


Isaac Asimov


The Early Asimov. Volume 1





or, Eleven Years of Trying








To the memory of John Wood Campbell, Jr. (1910-71) for reasons that this book will make amply obvious



Although I have written over a hundred and twenty books, on almost every subject from astronomy to Shakespeare and from mathematics to satire, it is probably as a science fiction writer that I am best known.
I began as a science fiction writer, and for the first eleven years of my literary career I wrote nothing but science fiction stories, for magazine publication only-and for minute payment. The thought of actually publishing honest-to-goodness books never entered my essentially humble mind.
But the time came when I did begin to produce books, and then I began to gather together the material I had earlier written for magazines. Between 1950 and 1969, ten collections appeared (all of which were published by Doubleday). These contained eighty-five stories (plus four pieces of comic verse) originally intended for, and published in, the science fiction magazines. Nearly a quarter of them came from those first eleven years.
For the record, these books are:

I, ROBOT (1950)
FOUNDATION (1951)
FOUNDATION AND EMPIRE (1952)
SECOND FOUNDATION (1953)
THE MARTIAN WAY AND OTHER STORIES (1955)
EARTH IS ROOM ENOUGH (1957)
NINE TOMORROWS (1959)
THE REST OF THE ROBOTS (1964)
ASIMOVíS MYSTERIES (1968)
NIGHTFALL AND OTHER STORIES (1969)


It might be argued that this was quite enough, but in arguing so, one is omitting the ravenous appetites of my readers (bless them!). I am constantly getting letters requesting lists of ancient stories out of me so that the letter writers can haunt secondhand shops for old magazines. There are people who prepare bibliographies of my science fiction (donít ask me why) and who want to know all sorts of half-forgotten details concerning them. They even grow distinctly angry when they find that some early stories were never sold and no longer exist. They want those, too, apparently, and seem to think I have negligently destroyed a natural resource.
So when Panther Books, in England, and Doubleday suggested that I make a collection of those of my early stories not already collected in the ten books listed above, with the literary history of each, I could resist no further. Everyone who has ever met me knows just how amenable to flattery I am, and if you think I can withstand this kind of flattery for more than half a second (as a rough estimate), you are quite wrong.
Fortunately I have a diary, which I have been keeping since January 1, 1938 (the day before my eighteenth birthday); it can give me dates and details. [The diary began as the sort of thing a teen-ager would write, but it quickly degenerated to a simple kind of literary record. It is, to anyone but myself, utterly boring-so boring, in fact, that I leave it around for anyone who wishes, to read. No one ever reads more than two pages. Occasionally someone asks me if I have never felt that my diary ought to record my innermost feelings and emotions, and my answer is always, ìNo. Never!î After all, whatís the point of being a writer if I have to waste my innermost feelings and emotions on a mere diary?]
I began to write when I was very young-eleven, I think. The reasons are obscure, I might say it was the result of an unreasoning urge, but that would just indicate I could think of no reason.
Perhaps it was because I was an avid reader in a family that was too poor to afford books, even the cheapest, and besides, a family that considered cheap books unfit reading. I had to go to the library (my first library card was obtained for me by my father when I was six years old) and make do with two books per week.
This was simply not enough, and my craving drove me to extremes. At the beginning of each school term, I eagerly read through every schoolbook I was assigned, going from cover to cover like a personified conflagration. Since I was blessed with a tenacious memory and with instant recall, that was all the studying I had to do for that school term, but I was through before the week was over, and then what?
So, when I was eleven, it occurred to me that if I wrote my own books, I could then reread them at my leisure. I never really wrote a complete book, of course. I would start one and keep rambling on with it till I outgrew it and then I would start another. All these early writings are forever gone, though I remember some of the details quite clearly.
In the spring of 1934 I took a special English course given at my high school (Boysí High School in Brooklyn) that placed the accent on writing. The teacher was also faculty adviser for the semiannual literary magazine put out by the students, and it was his intention to gather material. I took that course.
It was a humiliating experience. I was fourteen at the time, and a rather green and innocent fourteen. I wrote trifles, while everyone else in the class (who were sixteen apiece) wrote sophisticated, tragic mood pieces. All of them made no particular secret of their scorn for me, and though I resented it bitterly there was nothing I could do about it.
For a moment I thought I had them when one of my products was accepted for the semiannual literary magazine while many of theirs were rejected. Unfortunately the teacher told me, with callous insensitivity, that mine was the only item submitted that was humorous and that since he had to haveone non-tragic piece he was forced to take it.
It was called ìLittle Brothers,î dealt with the arrival of my own little brother five years earlier, and was my first piece of published material of any kind. I suppose it can be located in the records at Boysí High, but I donít have it
Sometimes I wonder what happened to all those great tragic writers in the class. I donít remember a single name and I have no intention of ever trying to find out-but I sometimes wonder.
It was not until May 29, 1937 (according to a date I once jotted down-though that was before I began my diary, so I wonít swear to it), that the vague thought occurred to me that I ought to write something for professional publication; something that would be paid for! Naturally it would have to be a science fiction story, for I had been an avid science fiction fan since 1929 and I recognized no other form of literature as in any way worthy of my efforts.
The story I began to compose for the purpose, the first story I ever wrote with a view to becoming a ìwriter,î was entitled ìCosmic Corkscrew.î
In it I viewed time as a helix (that is, something like a bedspring). Someone could cut across from one turn directly to the next, thus moving into the future by some exact interval but being incapable of traveling one day less into the future. My protagonist made the cut across time and found the Earth deserted. All animal life was gone; yet there was every sign that life had existed until very shortly before-and no indication at all of what had brought about the disappearance. It was told in the first person from a lunatic asylum, because the narrator had, of course, been placed in a madhouse after he returned and tried to tell his tale.
I wrote only a few pages in 1937, then lost interest. The mere fact that I had publication in mind must have paralyzed me. As long as something I wrote was intended for my own eyes only, I could be carefree enough. The thought of possible other readers weighed down heavily upon my every word. -So I abandoned it.
Then, in May 1938, the most important magazine in the field.Astounding Science Fiction, changed its publication schedule from the third Wednesday of the month to the fourth Friday. When the June issue did not arrive on its accustomed day, I went into a decline.
By May 17, I could stand it no more and took the subway to 79 Seventh Avenue, where the publishing house. Street amp; Smith Publications, Inc., was then located. [I told this story in some detail in an article entitled ìPortrait of the Writer as a Boy,î which was included as Chapter 17 of my book of essays Science, Numbers and I (Doubleday, 1968). In it, relying on memory alone, I said that I had called Street amp; Smith on the phone. When I went back to my diary to check actual dates for this book, I was astonished to discover that I had actually made the subway trip-an utterly daring venture for me in those days, and a measure of my desperation.] There, an official of the firm informed me of the changed schedule, and on May 19, the June issue arrived.
The near brush with doom, and the ecstatic relief that followed, reactivated my desire to write and publish. I returned to ìCosmic Corkscrewî and by June 19 it was finished.
The next question was what to do with it. I had absolutely no idea what one did with a manuscript intended for publication, and no one I knew had any idea either. I discussed it with my father, whose knowledge of the real world was scarcely greater than my own, and he had no idea either.
But then it occurred to me that, the month before, I had gone to 79 Seventh Avenue merely to inquire about the nonappearance ofAstounding. I had not been struck by lightning for doing so. Why not repeat the trip, then, and hand in the manuscript in person?
The thought was a frightening one. It became even more frightening when my father further suggested that necessary preliminaries included a shave and my best suit. That meant I would have to take additional time, and the day was already wearing on and I would have to be back in time to make the afternoon newspaper delivery. (My father had a candy store and newsstand, and life was very complicated in those days for a creative writer of artistic and sensitive bent such as myself. For instance, we lived in an apartment in which all the rooms were in a line and the only way of getting from the living room to the bedroom of my parents, or of my sister, or of my brother, was by going through my bedroom. My bedroom was therefore frequently gone through, and the fact that I might be in the throes of creation meant nothing to anyone.)
I compromised. I shaved, but did not bother changing suits, and off I went. The date was June 21, 1938.
I was convinced that, for daring to ask to see the editor ofAstounding Science Fiction, I would be thrown out of the building bodily, and that my manuscript would be torn up and thrown out after me in a shower of confetti. My father, however (who had lofty notions) was convinced that a writer-by which he meant anyone with a manuscript-would be treated with the respect due an intellectual. He had no fears at all- but I was the one who had to go into the building.
Trying to mask panic, I asked to see the editor. The girl behind the desk (I can see the scene in my mindís eye right now exactly as it was) spoke briefly on the phone and said, ìMr. Campbell will see you.î
She directed me through a large, loftlike room filled with huge rolls of paper and enormous piles of magazines and permeated with the heavenly smell of pulp (a smell that, to this day, will recall my youth in aching detail and reduce me to tears of nostalgia). And there, in a small room on the other side, was Mr. Campbell.
John Wood Campbell, Jr., had been working for Street amp; Smith for a year and had taken over sole command ofAstounding Stories (which he had promptly renamedAstounding Science Fiction) a couple of months earlier. He was only twenty-eight years old then. Under his own name and under his pen name, Don A. Stuart, he was one of the most famous and highly regarded authors of science fiction, but he was about to bury his writing reputation forever under the far greater renown he was to gain as editor.
He was to remain editor ofAstounding Science Fiction and of its successor,Analog Science Fact-Science Fiction, for a third of a century. During all that time, he and I were to remain friends, but however old I grew and however venerable and respected a star of our mutual field I was to become, I never approached him with anything but that awe he inspired in me on the occasion of our first meeting.
He was a large man, an opinionated man, who smoked and talked constantly, and who enjoyed, above anything else, the production of outrageous ideas, which he bounced off his listener and dared him to refute. It was difficult to refute Campbell even when his ideas were absolutely and madly illogical.
We talked for over an hour that first time. He showed me forthcoming issues of the magazine (actual future issues in the cellulose-flesh). I found he had printed a ëfan letter of mine in the issue about to be published, and another in the next-so he knew the genuineness of my interest.
He told me about himself, about his pen name and about his opinions. He told me that his father had sent in one of his manuscripts toAmazing Stories when he was seventeen and that it would have been published but the magazine lost it and he had no carbon. (I was ahead of him there. I had brought in the story myself and I had a carbon.) He also promised to read my story that night and to send a letter, whether acceptance or rejection, the next day. He promised also that in case of rejection he would tell me what was wrong with it so I could improve.
He lived up to every promise. Two days later, on June 23,
I heard from him. It was a rejection. (Since this book deals with real events and is not a fantasy-you canít be surprised that my first story was instantly rejected.)
Here is what I said in my diary about the rejection:
ìAt 9:30 I received back ëCosmic Corkscrewí with a polite letter of rejection. He didnít like the slow beginning, the suicide at the end.î
Campbell also didnít like the first-person narration and the stiff dialog, and further pointed out that the length (nine thousand words) was inconvenient-too long for a short story, too short for a novelette. Magazines had to be put together like jigsaw puzzles, you see, and certain lengths for individual stories were more convenient than others.
By that time, though, I was off and running. The joy of having spent an hour and more with John Campbell, the thrill of talking face to face and on even terms with an idol, had already filled me with the ambition to write another science fiction story, better than the first, so that I could try him again. The pleasant letter of rejection-two full pages-in which he discussed my story seriously and with no trace of patronization or contempt, reinforced my joy. Before June 23 was over, I was halfway through the first draft of another story.
Many years later I asked Campbell (with whom I had by then grown to be on the closest terms) why he had bothered with me at all, since that first story was surely utterly impossible.
ìIt was,î he said frankly, for he never flattered. ìOn the other hand, I saw something in you. You were eager and you listened and I knew you wouldnít quit no matter how many rejections I handed you. As long as you were willing to work hard at improving, I was willing to work with you.î
That was John. I wasnít the only writer, whether newcomer or oldtimer, that he was to work with in this fashion. Patiently, and out of his own enormous vitality and talent, he built up a stable of the best s.f. writers the world had, till then, ever seen.
What happened to ìCosmic Corkscrewî after that I donít really know. I abandoned it and never submitted it anywhere else. I didnít actually tear it up and throw it away; it simply languished in some desk drawer until eventually I lost track of it. In any case, it no longer exists.
This seems to be one of the main sources of discomfort among the archivists-they seem to think the first story I ever wrote for publication, however bad it might have been, was an important document. All I can say, fellows, is that Iím sorry but there was no way of my telling in 1938 that my first try might have historic interest someday. I may be a monster of vanity and arrogance, but Iím not that much a monster of vanity and arrogance.
Besides, before the month was out I had finished my second story, ìStowaway,î and I was concentrating on that. I brought it to Campbellís office on July 18, 1938, and he was just a trifle slower in returning it, but the rejection came on July 22. I said in my diary concerning the letter that accompanied it:
ìÖ it was the nicest possible rejection you could imagine. Indeed, the next best thing to an acceptance. He told me the idea was good and the plot passable. The dialog and handling, he continued, were neither stiff nor wooden (this was rather a delightful surprise to me) and that there was no one particular fault but merely a general air of amateurishness, constraint, forcing. The story did not go smoothly. This, he said, I would grow out of as soon as I had had sufficient experience. He assured me that I would probably be able to sell my stories but it meant perhaps a yearís work and a dozen stories before I could clickÖî
It is no wonder that such a ìrejection letterî kept me hotly charged with enormous enthusiasm to write, and I got promptly to work on a third story.
Whatís more, I was sufficiently encouraged to try to submit ìStowawayî elsewhere. In those days there were three science fiction magazines on the stands.Astounding was the aristocrat of the lot, a monthly with smooth edges and an appearance of class. The other two.Amazing Stories andThrilling Wonder Stories, were somewhat more primitive in appearance and printed stories, with more action and less-sophisticated plots. I sent ìStowawayî toThrilling Wonder Stories, which, however, also rejected it promptly on August 9, 1938 (with a form letter).
By then, though, I was deeply engaged with my third story, which, as it happened, was fated to do better-and do it faster. In this book, however, I am including my stories not in the order of publication but in order of writing-which I presume is more significant from the standpoint of literary development. Let me stay with ìStowaway,î therefore.
In the summer of 1939, by which time I had gained my first few successes, I returned to ìStowaway,î refurbished it somewhat, and triedThrilling Wonder Stories again. Undoubtedly I had a small suspicion that the new luster of my name would cause them to read it with a different attitude than had been the case when I was a complete unknown. I was quite wrong. It was rejected again.
Then I tried Amazing, and again it was rejected.
That meant the story was dead, or would have meant so were it not for the fact that science fiction was entering a small ìboomî as the 1930s approached their end. New magazines were being founded, and toward the end of 1939, plans were made to publish a magazine to be called Astonishing Stories, which would retail for the price of ten cents. (Astoundingcost twenty cents an issue.)
The new magazine, together with a sister magazine. Super Science Stories, were to be edited on a shoestring by a young science fiction fan, Frederik Pohl, who was then just turning twenty (he was about a month older than myself), and who, in this way, made his entry into what was to be a distinguished professional career in science fiction.
Pohl was a thin, soft-spoken young man, with hair that was already thinning, a solemn face, and a pronounced overbite that gave him a rabbity look when he smiled. The economic facts of his life kept him out of college, but he was far brighter (and knew more) than almost any college graduate Iíve ever met.
Pohl was a friend of mine (and still is) and perhaps did more to help me start my literary career than anyone except, of course, Campbell himself. We had attended fan-club meetings together. He had read my manuscripts and praised them -and now he needed stories in a hurry, and at low rates, for his new magazines.
He asked to look through my manuscripts again. He began by choosing one of my stories for his first issue. On November 17, 1939, nearly a year and a half after ìStowawayî was first written, Pohl selected it for inclusion in his second issue of Astonishing. He was an inveterate title changer, however, and he plastered ìThe Callistan Menaceî on the story and that was how it was published.
So here it is, the second story I ever wrote and the earliest story to see professional publication. The reader can judge for himself whether Campbellís critique, given above, was overly kind and whether he was justified in foreseeing a professional writing career for me on the basis of this story.
ìThe Callistan Menaceî appears here (as will all the stories in this volume) exactly as it appeared in the magazine with only the editing and adjustment required to correct typographical errors.






The Callistan Menace


ìDamn Jupiter!î growled Ambrose Whitefield viciously, and I nodded agreement.
ìIíve been on the Jovian satellite run,î I said, ìfor fifteen years and Iíve heard those two words spoken maybe a million times. Itís probably the most sincere curse in the Solar System.î
Our watch at the controls of the scoutship Ceres had just been relieved and we descended the two levels to our room with dragging steps.
ìDamn Jupiter-and damn it again,î insisted Whitefield morosely. ìItís too big for the System. It stays out there behind us and pulls and pulls and pulls! Weíve got to keep the Atomos firing all the way. Weíve got to check our course- completely-every hour. No relaxation, no coasting, no taking it easy! nothing but the rottenest kind of work.î
There were tiny beads of perspiration on his forehead and he swabbed at them with the back of his hand. He was a young fellow, scarcely thirty, and you could see in his eyes that he was nervous, and even a little frightened.
And it wasnít Jupiter that was bothering him, in spite of his profanity. Jupiter was the least of our worries. It was Callisto! It was that little moon which gleamed a pale blue upon our visiplates that made Whitefield sweat and that had spoiled four nightsí sleep for me already. Callisto! Our destination!
Even old Mac Steeden, gray mustachioed veteran who, in his youth, had sailed with the great Peewee Wilson himself, went about his duties with an absent stare. Four days out- and ten days more ahead of us-and panic was reaching out with clammy fingers.
We were all brave enough in the ordinary course of events. The eight of us on the Ceres had faced the purple Lectronics and stabbing Disintos of pirates and rebels and the alien environments of half a dozen worlds. But it takes more than run-of-the-mill bravery to face the unknown; to face Callisto, the ìmystery worldî of the Solar System.
One fact was known about Callisto-one grim, bare fact. Over a period of twenty-five years, seven ships, progressively better equipped, had landed-and never been heard from again. The Sunday supplements peopled the satellite with anything from super-dinosaurs to invisible ghosts of the fourth dimension, but that did not solve the mystery.
We were the eighth. We had a better ship than any of those preceding. We were the first to sport the newly-developed beryl-tungsten hull, twice as strong as the old steel shells. We possessed super-heavy armaments and the very latest Atomic Drive engines.
Still-we were only the eighth, and every man jack of us knew it.
Whitefield entered our quarters silently and flopped down upon his bunk. His fists were clenched under his chin and showed white at the knuckles. It seemed to me that he wasnít far from the breaking point. It was a case for careful diplomacy.
ìWhat we need,î said I, ìis a good, stiff drink.î
ìWhat we need,î he answered harshly, ìis a hell of a lot of good, stiff drinks.î
ìWell, whatís stopping us?î
He looked at me suspiciously, ìYou know there isnít a drop of liquor aboard ship. Itís against Navy regulations!î
ìSparkling green Jabra water,î I said slowly, letting the words drip from my mouth. ìAged beneath the Martian deserts. Melted emerald juice. Bottles of it! Cases of it!î
ìWhere?î
ìI know where. What do you say? A few drinks-just a few-will cheer us both up.î
For a moment, his eyes sparkled, and then they dulled again, ìWhat if the Captain finds out? Heís a stickler for discipline, and on a trip like this, itís liable to cost us our rating.î
I winked and grinned, ìItís the Captainís own cache. He canít discipline us without cutting his own throat-the old hypocrite. Heís the best damn Captain there ever was, but he likes his emerald water.î
Whitefield stared at me long and hard, ìAll right. Lead me to it.î
We slipped down to the supply room, which was deserted, of course. The Captain and Steeden were at the controls; Brock and Charney were at the engines; and Harrigan and Tuley were snoring their fool heads off in their own room.
Moving as quietly as I could, through sheer habit, I pushed aside several crates of food tabs and slid open a hidden panel near the floor. I reached in and drew out a dusty bottle, which, in the dim light, sparkled a dull sea-green.
ìSit down,î I said, ìand make yourself comfortable.î I produced two tiny cups and filled them.
Whitefield sipped slowly and with every evidence of satisfaction. He downed his second at one gulp.
ìHow come you volunteered for this trip, anyway, Whitey?î I asked, ìYouíre a little green for a thing like this.î
He waved his hand, ìYou know how it is. Things get dull after a while. I went in for zoology after getting out of college-big field since interplanetary travel-and had a nice comfortable position back on Ganymede. It was dull, though;
I was bored blue. So I joined the Navy on an impulse, and on another I volunteered for this trip.î He sighed ruefully, ìIím a little sorry I did.î
ìThatís not the way to take it, kid. Iím experienced and I know. When youíre panicky, youíre as good as licked. Why, two months from now, weíll be back on Ganymede.î
ìIím not scared, if thatís what youíre thinking,î he exclaimed angrily. ìItís-itís,î there was a long pause in which he frowned at his third cupful. ìWell, Iím just worn out trying to imagine what the hell to expect. My imagination is working overtime and my nerves are rubbing raw.î
ìSure, sure,î I soothed, ìIím not blaming you. Itís that way with all of us, I guess. But you have to be careful. Why, I remember once on a Mars-Titan trip, we had-î
Whitefield interrupted what was one of my favorite yarns- and I could spin them as well as anyone in the service-with a jab in the ribs that knocked the breath out of me.
He put down his Jabra gingerly.
ìSay, Jenkins,î he stuttered, ìI havenít downed enough liquor to be imagining things, have I?î
ìThat depends on what you imagined.î
ìI could swear I saw something move somewhere in the pile of empty crates in the far corner.î
ìThatís a bad sign,î and I took another swig as I said it. ìYour nerves are going to your eyes and now theyíre going back on you. Ghosts, I suppose, or the Callistan menace looking us over in advance.î
ìI saw it, I tell you. Thereís something alive there.î He edged towards me-his nerves were plenty shot-and for a moment, in the dim, shadowy light even I felt a bit choked up.
ìYouíre crazy,î I said in a loud voice, and the echoes calmed me down a bit. I put down my empty cup and got up just a wee bit unsteadily. ìLetís go over and poke through the crates.î
Whitefield followed me and together we started shoving the light aluminum cubicles this way and that. Neither of us was quite one hundred per cent sober and we made a fair amount of noise. Out of the corner of my eye, I could see Whitefield trying to move the case nearest the wall.
ìThis one isnít empty,î he grunted, as it lifted very slightly off the floor.
Muttering under his breath, he knocked off the cover and looked in. For a half second he just stared and then he backed away slowly. He tripped over something and fell into a sitting position, still gaping at the case.
I watched his actions with raised eyebrows, then glanced hastily at the case in question. The glance froze into a steady glare, and I emitted a hoarse yell that rattled off each of the four walls.
A boy was sticking his head out of the case-a red-haired dirty-faced kid of thirteen or thereabouts.
ìHello,î said the boy as he clambered out into the open. Neither of us found the strength to answer him, so he continued, ìIím glad you found me. I was getting a cramp in my shoulder trying to curl up in there.î
Whitefield gulped audibly, ìGood God! A kid stowaway! And on a voyage to Callisto !î
ìAnd we canít turn back,î I reminded in a stricken voice, ìwithout wrecking ourselves. The Jovian satellite run is poison.î
ìLook here,î Whitefield turned on the kid in a sudden belligerence. ìWho are you, you young nut, and what are you doing here?î
The kid flinched. ìIím Stanley Fields,î he answered, a bit scared. ìIím from New Chicago on Ganymede. I-I ran away to space, like they do in books.î He paused and then asked brightly, ìDo you think weíll have a fight with pirates on this trip, mister?î
There was no doubt that the kid was filled to the brim with ìDime Spacers.î I used to read them myself as a youngster.
ìHow about your parents?î asked Whitefield, grimly.
ìOh, all I gotís an uncle. He wonít care much, I guess.î He had gotten over his first uneasiness and stood grinning at us.
ìWell, whatís to be done?î said Whitefield, looking at me in complete helplessness.
I shrugged, ìTake him to the Captain. Let him worry.î
ìAnd how will he take it?î
ìAnyway he wants. Itís not our fault. Besides, thereís absolutely nothing to be done about the mess.î
And grabbing an arm apiece, we walked away, dragging the kid between us.
Captain Bartlett is a capable officer and one of the deadpan type that very rarely displays emotion. Consequently, on those few occasions when he does, itís like a Mercurian volcano in full eruption-and you havenít lived until youíve seen one of those.
It was a case of the final straw. A satellite run is always wearing. The image of Callisto up ahead was harder on him than on any member of the crew. And now there was this kid stowaway.
It wasnít to be endured! For half an hour, the Captain shot off salvo after salvo of the very worst sort of profanity. He started with the sun and ran down the list of planets, satellites, asteroids, comets, to the very meteors themselves. He was starting on the nearer fixed stars, when he collapsed from sheer nervous exhaustion. He was so excited that he never thought to ask us what we were doing in the storeroom in the first place, and for that Whitefield and I were duly grateful.
But Captain Bartlett is no fool. Having purged his system of its nervous tension, he saw clearly that that which cannot be cured must be endured.
ìSomeone take him and wash him up,î he growled wearily, ìand keep him out of my sight for a while.î Then, softening a bit, he drew me towards him, ìDonít scare him by telling him where weíre going. Heís in a bad spot, the poor kid.î
When we left, the old soft-hearted fraud was sending through an emergency message to Ganymede trying to get in touch with the kidís uncle.
Of course, we didnít know it at the time, but that kid was a Godsend-a genuine stroke of Old Man Luck. He took our minds off Callisto. He gave us something else to think about. The tension, which at the end of four days had almost reached the breaking point, eased completely.
There was something refreshing in the kidís natural gayety; in his bright ingenuousness. He would meander about the ship asking the silliest kind of questions. He insisted on expecting pirates at any moment. And, most of all, he persisted in regarding each and every one of us as ìDime Spacerî heroes.
That last flattered our egos, of course, and put us on our mettle. We vied with each other in chest-puffing and tale-telling, and old Mac Steeden, who in Stanleyís eyes was a demi-god, broke the all-time record for plain and fancy lying.
I remember, particularly, the talk-fest we had on the seventh day out. We were just past the midpoint of the trip and were set to begin a cautious deceleration. All of us (except Harrigan and Tuley, who were at the engines) were sitting in the control room. Whitefield, with half an eye on the Mathematico, led off, and, as usual, talked zoology.
ìItís a little slug-like thing,î he was saying, ìfound only on Europa. Itís called the Carolus Europis but we always referred to it as the Magnet Worm. Itís about six inches long and has a sort of a slate-grey color-most disgusting thing you could imagine.
ìWe spent six months studying that worm, though, and I never saw old Mornikoff so excited about anything before. You see, it killed by some sort of magnetic field. You put the Magnet Worm at one end of the room and a caterpillar, say, at the other. You wait about five minutes and the caterpillar just curls up and dies.
ìAnd the funny thing is this. It wonít touch a frog-too big; but if you take that frog and put some sort of iron band about it, that Magnet Worm kills it just like that. Thatís why we know itís some type of magnetic field that does it-the presence of iron more than quadruples its strength.î
His story made quite an impression on us. Joe Brockís deep bass voice sounded, ìIím damn glad those things are only four inches long, if what you say is right.î
Mac Steeden stretched and then pulled at his grey mustachios with exaggerated indifference, ìYou call that worm unusual. It isnít a patch on some of the things Iíve seen in my day-.î He shook his head slowly and reminiscently, and we knew we were in for a long and gruesome tale. Someone groaned hollowly, but Stanley brightened up the minute he saw the old veteran was in a story-telling mood.
Steeden noticed the kidís sparkling eyes, and addressed himself to the little fellow, ìI was with Peewee Wilson when it happened-youíve heard of Peewee Wilson, havenít you?î
ìOh, yes,î Stanleyís eyes fairly exuded hero-worship. ìIíve read books about him. He was the greatest spacer there ever was.î
ìYou bet all the radium on Titan he was, kid. He wasnít any taller than you, and didnít scale much more than a hundred pounds, but he was worth five times his weight in Venusian Devils in any fight. And me and him were just like that. He never went anyplace but what I was with him. When the going was toughest it was always me that he turned to.î
He sighed lugubriously, ìI was with him to the very end. It was only a broken leg that kept me from going with him on his last voyage-î
He choked off suddenly and a chilly silence swept over all of us. Whitefieldís face went gray, the Captainís mouth twisted in a funny sort of way, and I felt my heart skid all the way down to the soles of my feet.
No one spoke, but there was only one thought among the six of us. Peewee Wilsonís last trip had been to Callisto. He had been the second-and had never returned. We were the eighth.
Stanley stared from one to the other of us in astonishment, but we all avoided his eyes.
It was Captain Bartlett that recovered first.
ìSay, Steeden, youíve got an old spacesuit of Peewee Wilsonís, havenít you?î His voice was calm and steady but I could see that it took a great deal of effort to keep it so.
Steeden brightened and looked up. He had been chewing at the tips of his mustachios (he always did when nervous) and now they hung downwards in a bedraggled fashion.
ìSure thing. Captain. He gave it to me with his own hand, he did. It was back in ë23 when the new steel suits were just being put out. Peewee didnít have any more use for his old vitri-rubber contraption, so he let me have it-and Iíve kept it ever since. Itís good luck for me.î
ìWell, I was thinking that we might fix up that old suit for the boy here. No other suitíll fit him, and he needs one bad.î
The veteranís faded eyes hardened and he shook his head vigorously, ìNo sir. Captain. No one touches that old suit Peewee gave it to me himself. With his own hand! Itís-itís sacred, thatís what it is.î
The rest of us chimed in immediately upon the Captainís side but Steedenís obstinacy grew and hardened. Again and again he would repeat tonelessly, ìThat old suit stays where it is.î And he would emphasize the statement with a blow of his gnarled fist.
We were about to give up, when Stanley, hitherto discreetly silent, took a hand.
ìPlease, Mr. Steeden,î there was just the suspicion of a quaver in his voice. ìPlease let me have it. Iíll take good care of it. Iíll bet if Peewee Wilson were alive today heíd say I could have it.î His blue eyes misted up and his lower lip trembled a bit. The kid was a perfect actor.
Steeden looked irresolute and took to biting his mustachio again, ìWell-oh, hell, youíve all got it in for me. The kid can have it but donít expect me to fix it up! The rest of you can lose sleep-I wash my hands of it.î
And so Captain Bartlett killed two birds with one stone. He took our minds off Callisto at a time when the morale of the crew hung in the balance and he gave us something to think about for the remainder of the trip-for renovating that ancient relic of a suit was almost a weekís job.
We worked over that antique with a concentration out of all proportion to the importance of the job. In its pettiness, we forgot the steadily growing orb of Callisto. We soldered every | last crack and blister in that venerable suit. We patched the inside with close-meshed aluminum wire. We refurbished the tiny heating unit and installed new tungsten oxygen-containers.
Even the Captain was not above giving us a hand with the suit, and Steeden, after the first day, in spite of his tirade at the beginning, threw himself into the job with a will.
We finished it the day before the scheduled landing, and Stanley, when he tried it on, glowed with pride, while Steeden stood by, grinning and twirling his mustachio.
And as the days passed, the pale blue circle that was Callisto grew upon the visiplate until it took up most of the sky. The last day was an uneasy one. We went about our tasks abstractedly, and studiously avoided the sight of the hard, emotionless satellite ahead.
We dived-in a long, gradually contracting spiral. By this maneuvre, the Captain had hoped to gain some preliminary knowledge of the nature of the planet and its inhabitants, but the information gained was almost entirely negative. The large percentage of carbon dioxide present in the thin, cold atmosphere was congenial to plant life, so that vegetation was plentiful and diversified. However, the three per cent oxygen content seemed to preclude the possibility of any animal life, other than the simplest and most sluggish species. Nor was there any evidence at all of cities or artificial structures of any kind.
Five times we circled Callisto before sighting a large lake, shaped something like a horseís head. It was towards that lake that we gently lowered ourselves, for the last message of the second expedition-Peewee Wilsonís expedition-spoke of landing near such a lake.
We were still half a mile in the air, when we located the gleaming metal ovoid that was the Phobos, and when we finally thumped softly on to the green stubble of vegetation, we were scarcely five hundred yards from the unfortunate craft.
ìStrange,î muttered the Captain, after we had all congregated in the control room, waiting for further orders, ìthere seems to be no evidence of any violence at all.î
It was true! The Phobos lay quietly, seemingly unharmed. Its old-fashioned steel hull glistened brightly in the yellow light of a gibbous Jupiter, for the scant oxygen of the atmosphere could make no rusty inroads upon its resistant exterior.
The Captain came out of a brown study and turned to Charney at the radio.
ìGanymede has answered?î
ìYes, sir. They wish us luck.î He said it simply, but a cold shiver ran down my spine.
Not a muscle of the Captainís face flickered. ìHave you tried to communicate with the Phobos?î
ìNo answer, sir.î
ìThree of us will investigate the Phobos. Some of the answers, at least, should be there.î
ìMatchstickstî grunted Brock, stolidly.
The Captain nodded gravely.
He palmed eight matches, breaking three in half, and extended his arm towards us, without saying a word.
Charney stepped forward and drew first. It was broken and he stepped quietly towards the space-suit rack. Tuley followed and after him Harrigan and Whitefield. Then I, and I drew the second broken match. I grinned and followed Charney, and in thirty seconds, old Steeden himself joined us.
ìThe ship will be backing you fellows,î said the Captain quietly, as he shook our hands. ìIf anything dangerous turns up, run for it No heroics now, for we canít afford to lose men.î
We inspected our pocket Lectronics and left. We didnít know exactly what to expect and werenít sure but that our first steps on Callistan soil might not be our last, but none of us hesitated an instant. In the ìDime Spacers,î courage is a very cheap commodity, but it is rather more expensive in real life. And it is with considerable pride that I recall the firm steps with which we three left the protection of the Ceres .
I looked back only once and caught a glimpse of Stanleyís face pressed white against the thick glass of the porthole. Even from a distance, his excitement was only too apparent. Poor kid! For the last two days he had been convinced we were on our way to clean up a pirate stronghold and was almost dying with impatience for the fighting to begin. Of course, none of us cared to disillusion him.
The outer hull of the Phobos rose before us and overshadowed us with its might. The giant vessel lay in the dark green stubble, silent as death. One of the seven that had attempted and failed. And we were the eighth.
Charney broke the uneasy silence, ìWhat are these white smears on the hull?î
He put up a metal-encased finger and rubbed it along the steel plate. He withdrew it and gazed at the soft white pulp upon it. With an involuntary shudder of disgust, he scraped it off upon the coarse grass beneath.
ìWhat do you think it is?î
The entire ship as far as we could see-except for that portion immediately next the ground-was besmeared by a thin layer of the pulpy substance. It looked like dried foam-like-
I said: ìIt looks like slime left after a giant slug had come out of the lake and slithered over the ship.î
I wasnít serious in my statement, of course, but the other two cast hasty looks at the mirror-smooth lake in which Jupiterís image lay unruffled. Charney drew his hand Lectronic.
ìHere!î cried Steeden, suddenly, his voice harsh and metallic as it came over the radio, ìthatís no way to be talking. Weíve got to find some way of getting into the ship; there must be some break in its hull somewhere. You go around to the right, Charney, and you, Jenkins, to the left. Iíll see if I canít get atop of this thing somehow.î
Eyeing the smoothly-round hull carefully, he drew back and jumped. On Callisto; of course, he weighed only twenty pounds or less, suit and all, so he rose upwards some thirty or forty feet. He slammed against the hull lightly, and as he started sliding downwards, he grabbed a rivet-head and scrambled to the top.
Waving a parting to Charney at this point, I left.
ìEverything all right?î the Captainís voice sounded thinly in my ear.
ìAll O.K.,î I replied gruffly, ìso far.î And as I said so, the Ceres disappeared behind the convex bulge of the dead Phobos and I was entirely alone upon the mysterious moon.
I pursued my round silently thereafter. The spaceshipís ìskinî was entirely unbroken except for the dark, staring portholes, the lowest of which were still well above my head. Once or twice I thought I could see Steeden scrambling monkey-like on top of the smooth hulk, but perhaps that was only fancy.
I reached the prow at last which was bathed in the full light of Jupiter. There, the lowest row of portholes were low enough to see into and as I passed from one to the other, I felt as if I were gazing into a shipful of spectres, for in the ghostly light all objects appeared only as flickering shadows.
It was the last window in the line that proved to be of sudden, overpowering interest. In the yellow rectangle of Jupiter-light stamped upon the floor, there sprawled what remained of a man. His clothes were draped about him loosely and his shirt was ridged as if the ribs below had moulded it into position. In the space between the open shirt collar and engineerís cap, there showed a grinning, eyeless skull. The cap, resting askew upon the smooth skullcase, seemed to add the last refinement of horror to the sight.
A shout in my ears caused my heart to leap. It was Steeden, exclaiming profanely somewhere above the ship. Almost at once, I caught sight of his ungainly steel-clad body slipping and sliding down the side of the ship.
We raced towards him in long, floating leaps and he waved us on, running ahead of us, towards the lake. At its very shores, he stopped and bent over some half-buried object Two bounds brought us to him, and we saw that the object was a space-suited human, lying face downward. Over it was a thick layer of the same slimy smear that covered the Phobos.
ìI caught sight of it from the heights of the ship,î said Steeden, somewhat breathlessly, as he turned the suited figure over.
What we saw caused all three of us to explode in a simultaneous cry. Through the glassy visor, there appeared a leprous countenance. The features were putrescent, fallen apart, as if decay had set in and ceased because of the limited air supply. Here and there a bit of gray bone showed through. It was the most repulsive sight I have ever witnessed, though I have seen many almost as bad.
ìMy God!î Charneyís voice was half a sob. ëThey simply die and decay.î I told Steeden of the clothed skeleton I had seen through the porthole.
ìDamn it, itís a puzzle,î growled Steeden, ìand the answer must be inside the Phobos.î There was a momentary silence, ìI tell you what. One of us can go back and get the Captain to dismount the Disintegrator. It ought to be light enough to handle on Callisto, and at low power, we can draw it fine enough to cut a hole without blowing the entire ship to kingdom come. You go, Jenkins. Charney and I will see if we canít find any more of the poor devils.î
I set off for the Ceres without further urging, covering the ground in space-devouring leaps. Three-quarters of the distance had been covered when a loud shout, ringing metallically in my ear, brought me to a skidding halt. I wheeled. in dismay and remained petrified at the sight before my eyes.
The surface of the lake was broken into boiling foam, and from it there reared the fore-parts of what appeared to be giant caterpillars. They squirmed out upon land, dirty-grey bodies dripping slime and water. They were some four feet long, about one foot in thickness, and their method of locomotion was the slowest of oxygen-conserving crawls. Except for one stalky growth upon their forward end, the tip of which glowed a faint red, they were absolutely featureless.
Even as I watched, their numbers increased, until the shore became one heaving mass of sickly gray flesh.
Charney and Steeden were running towards the Ceres , but less than half the distance had been covered when they stumbled, their run slowing to a blind stagger. Even that ceased, and almost together they fell to their knees.
Charneyís voice sounded faintly in my ear, ìGet help! My head is splitting. I canít move! I-î Both lay still now.
I started towards them automatically, but a sudden sharp pang just over my temples staggered me, and for a moment I stood confused.
Then I heard a sudden unearthly shout from Whitefield, ìGet back to the ship, Jenkins! Get back! Get back!î
I turned to obey, for the pain had increased into a continuous tearing pain. I weaved and reeled as I approached the yawning airlock, and I believe that I was at the point of collapse when I finally fell into it. After that, I can recall only a jumble for quite a period.
My next clear impression was of the control-room of the Ceres . Someone had dragged the suit off me, and I gazed about me in dismay at a scene of the utmost confusion. My brain was still somewhat addled and Captain Bartlett as he leant over me appeared double.
ìDo you know what those damnable creatures are?î He pointed outwards at the giant caterpillars.
I shook my head mutely.
ìTheyíre the great grand-daddies of the Magnet Worm Whitefield was telling us of once. Do you remember the Magnet Worm?î
I nodded, ìThe one that kills by a magnetic field which is strengthened by surrounding iron.î
ìDamn it, yes,î cried Whitefield, interrupting suddenly. ìIíll swear to it. If it wasnít for the lucky chance that our hull is beryl-tungsten and not steel-like the Phobos and the rest-every last one of us would be unconscious by now and dead before long.î
ìThen thatís the Callistan menace.î My voice rose in sudden dismay, ìBut what of Charney and Steeden?î
ìTheyíre sunk,î muttered the Captain grimly. ìUnconscious -maybe dead. Those filthy worms are crawling towards them and thereís nothing we can do about it.î He ticked off the points on his fingers. ìWe canít go after them in a spacesuit without signing our own death warrant-spacesuits are steel. No one can last there and back without one. We have no weapons with a beam fine enough to blast the Worms without scorching Charney and Steeden as well. Iíve thought of maneuvering the Ceres nearer and making a dash for it, but one canít handle a spaceship on planetary surfaces like that-not without cracking up. We-î
ìIn short,î I interrupted hollowly, ìweíve got to stand here and watch them die.î He nodded and I turned away bitterly.
I felt a slight twitch upon my sleeve, and when I turned, it was to find Stanleyís wide blue eyes staring up at me. In the excitement, I had forgotten about him, and now I regarded him bad-temperedly.
ìWhat is it?î I snapped.
ìMr. Jenkins,î his eyes were red, and I think he would have preferred pirates to Magnet Worms by a good deal, ìMr. Jenkins, maybe I could go and get Mr. Charney and Mr. Steeden.î
I sighed, and turned away.
ìBut, Mr. Jenkins, I could. I heard what Mr. Whitefield said, and my spacesuit isnít steel. Itís vitri-rubber.î
ìThe kidís right,î whispered Whitefield slowly, when Stanley repeated his offer to the assembled men. ìThe unstrengthened field doesnít harm us, thatís evident. Heíd be safe in a vitri-rubber suit.î
ìBut itís a wreck, that suit!î objected the Captain. ìI never really intended having the kid use it.î He ended raggedly and his manner was evidently irresolute.
ìWe canít leave Neal and Mac out there without trying, Captain,î said Brock stolidly.
The Captain made up his mind suddenly and became a whirlwind of action. He dived into the space-suit rack for the battered relic himself, and helped Stanley into it.
ìGet Steeden first,î said the Captain, as he clipped shut the last bolt. ìHeís older and has less resistance to the field. -Good luck to you, kid, and if you canít make it, come back right away. Right away, do you hear me?î
Stanley sprawled at the first step, but life on Ganymede had inured him to below-normal gravities and he recovered quickly. There was no sign of hesitation, as he leaped towards the two prone figures, and we breathed easier. Evidently, the magnetic field was not affecting him yet.
He had one of the suited figures over his shoulders now and was proceeding back to the ship at an only slightly slower pace. As he dropped his burden inside the airlock, he waved an arm to us at the window and we waved back. He had scarcely left, when we had Steeden inside. We ripped the spacesuit off him and laid him out, a gaunt pale figure, on the couch.
The Captain bent an ear to his chest and suddenly laughed aloud in sudden relief, ìThe old geezerís still going strong.î
We crowded about happily at hearing that, all eager to place a finger upon his wrist and so assure ourselves of the life within him. His face twitched, and when a low, blurred voice suddenly whispered, ìSo I said to Peewee, I said-î our last doubts were put to rest.
It was a sudden, sharp cry from Whitefield that drew us back to the window again, ìSomethingís wrong with the kid.î
Stanley was half way back to the ship with his second burden, but he was staggering now-progressing erratically.
ìIt canít be,î whispered Whitefield, hoarsely, ìit canít be. The field canít be getting him!î
ìGod!î the Captain tore at his hair wildly, ìthat damned antique has no radio. He canít tell us whatís wrong.î He wrenched away suddenly. ìIím going after him. Field or no field, Iím going to get him.î
ìHold on. Captain,î said Tuley, grabbing him by the arm, ìhe may make it.î
Stanley was running again, but in a curious weaving fashion that made it quite plain, he didnít see where he was going. Two or three times he slipped and fell but each time he managed to scramble up again. He fell against the hull of the ship, at last, and felt wildly about for the yawning airlock. We shouted and prayed and sweated, but could help in no way.
And then he simply disappeared. He had come up against the lock and fallen inside.
We had them both inside in record time, and divested them of their suits. Charney was alive, we saw that at a glance, and after that we deserted him unceremoniously for Stanley. The blue of his face, his swollen tongue, the line of fresh ìblood running from nose to chin told its own story.
ìThe suit sprung a leak,î said Harrigan.
ìGet away from him,î ordered the Captain, ìgive him air.î
We waited. Finally, a soft moan from the kid betokened returning consciousness and we all grinned in concert.
ìSpunky little kid,î said the Captain. ìHe travelled that last hundred yards on nerve and nothing else.î Then, again. ìSpunky little kid. Heís going to get a Naval Medal for this, if I have to give him my own.î
Callisto was a shrinking blue ball on the televisor-an ordinary unmysterious world. Stanley Fields, honorary Captain of the good ship Ceres , thumbed his nose at it, protruding his tongue at the same time. An inelegant gesture, but the symbol of Manís triumph over a hostile Solar System.



***



As I reread the story now (itís the first time Iíve reread it since it was published) I am amused to see that my stowaway youngsterís name is Stanley. That is the name of my younger brother, who was only nine when I wrote the story (the same younger brother who was the subject of my Boysí High essay, and who is now Assistant Publisher of the Long Island Newsday). Why it is necessary to use ìreal namesî I donít know, but almost every beginning writer does so, I suspect.
You will notice that there are no girls in the story. This is not really surprising. At eighteen I was busy finishing college and working in my fatherís candy store and handling a paper delivery route morning and evening, and I had actually never had time to have a date. I didnít know anything at all about girls (except for such biology as I got out of books and from other, more knowledgeable, boys).
I eventually had dates and I eventually introduced girls into my stories, but the early imprinting had its effect. To this very day, the romantic element in my stories is minor and the sexual element virtually nil.
On the other hand, I wonder if the above explanation for the lack of sex in my stories is not an oversimplification. After all, I am also a teetotaler and yet I notice that my characters drink Martian Jabra water (whatever that is).
My knowledge of astronomy was quite respectable but I let myself be overinfluenced by the conventions common in the science fiction of that era. All worlds were Earthlike and inhabited in those days, so I gave Callisto an atmosphere containing a small quantity of free oxygen. I also gave it running water, and both plant and animal life. All of this is, of course, unlikely in the extreme, and what evidence we have seems to make of Callisto an airless, waterless world like our Moon (and, of course, I really knew this even back then).
Back to my third story, now-
On July 30, 1938, only eight days after Campbellís second rejection, I had finished my third story, ìMarooned off Vesta.î I did not think it politic to see Campbell oftener than once a month, however, since I suspected that I might easily wear out my welcome if I did. I put ìMarooned off Vestaî to one side, therefore, and began to write other stories. By the end of the month I had two more: ìThis Irrational Planetî and ìRing Around the Sun.î
My first three stories, including ìMarooned off Vesta,î had been typed on a very old, but completely serviceable Underwood No. 5 typewriter, which my father had obtained for me in 1936 for ten dollars. After I had submitted my second story to Campbell, however, my father decided that I was in earnest about a writing career, and feeling that my failure to sell was irrelevant and, in any case, temporary, he set about getting me a brand-new typewriter.
On August 10, 1938, a Smith-Corona portable entered the house and it was on the new typewriter that my fourth and fifth stories were written.
Of the three, I felt ìThis Irrational Planetî to be the weakest, so I did not submit it to Campbell. I submitted it directly to Thrilling Wonder Stories on August 26, and it was not rejected till September 24. Campbell had spoiled me, and the four-week interval between submission and rejection appalled me. I even called during that interval to make an indignant inquiry-not knowing that a mere four-week wait was brief indeed for anyone but Campbell.
But at least the rejection, when it came, was typewritten ë and was not a printed form. Whatís more, it contained the sentence, ìTry us again, wonít you?î That encouraged me. Perhaps I underestimated the story. Buoyantly, I tried Campbell, and he rejected it in six days. Five other magazines rejected it afterward. I never did sell it, and ìThis Irrational Planetî is also nonexistent now. I donít even remember the plot, except that Iím pretty certain that the planet of the title was Earth itself. (The only other information I have about it is that it was quite short, only three thousand words long. Actually, most of the stories of those early years that I never sold, and no longer exist, were short. The longest was the first, ìCosmic Corkscrew.î)
The other two stories written in the same month were reserved for a better fate, but it didnít seem so at first On August 30, 1938, I visited Campbell for the third time and submitted both ìMarooned off Vestaî and ìRing Around the Sunî-and both were returned to me on September 8.
The very next day I shipped off ìMarooned off Vesta,î which I felt to be the better of the two, to Amazing Stories . It took a month and a half to hear from them, but this time the wait was worth it. On October 21, 1938, there came a letter of acceptance from Raymond A. Palmer, who was then editor of Amazing and who has since achieved his greatest fame as a leading figure in the flying saucers craze and in other forms of occultism. To this day I have never met Mr. Palmer personally.
It was my first acceptance, four months to the day after my first visit to John Campbell. By that time I had written six stories and had collected nine rejections from Various magazines. The check, for $64 (one cent a word), followed on October 31, and that was the first money I ever earned as a professional writer. [In this book, I am going to pay considerable attention to the money I received for my stories. This is not because I write primarily for money or regarded money as particularly important either then or now (my publishers will gladly bear witness to this). The money I received, however, was crucial in determining my career. It paid enough to put me through school and not so much as to lure me out of it. Youíll see as we go along.]
For a number of years I kept that first acceptance letter, from Palmer, framed on my bedroom wall. But in the vicissitudes of life, it, too, has disappeared and, yes, Iím sorry.
The story appeared in the March 1939 issue of Amazing Stories , which reached the newsstands on January 10, 1939, just eight days after my nineteenth birthday. It was the first occasion on which I ever appeared professionally, and I still have an intact copy of that issue of the magazine. I did not save one at the time (my sense of historical importance, as I have already explained, is deficient) but eventually removed my story for binding and discarded the rest. Ordinarily, I donít mind doing this and have done it ruthlessly through all the years (space is limited even in the best of apartments when one is as prolific as I have been), but the time came when I was sorry I hadnít saved that first one intact. The well-known science fiction fan Forrest J Ackerman heard me express regret and kindly sent me a copy in excellent condition.
That copy, by the way, contains a little autobiographical squib in the rear, written by my teen-age self. On rereading, years later, it turned out to be exquisitely embarrassing.
ìMarooned off Vestaî is not included here, since it appeared in Asimovís Mysteries . (This doesnít mean it was a mystery. The reason for its inclusion in that particular collection is explained there. -Well, go ahead, buy the book and satisfy your curiosity.)
As for ìRing Around the Sun,î it was rejected by Thrilling Wonder Stories , but then, on February 5, 1939, it was accepted by Future Fiction , one of the new science fiction magazines that were springing up.
It appeared in the second issue of that magazine, which did not, however, reach the stands until nearly a year after the sale. The payment (theoretically on publication, rather than on acceptance as was Campbellís more civilized procedure) was even more delayed. Whatís more, it was at the rate of only half a cent a word, so the check came to a mere twenty-five dollars. Astonishing Stories also paid only half a cent a word at that time, but ìThe Callistan Menaceî was the longer story-6,500 words-so it netted me $32.50.
I didnít feel put upon, however. I well knew by that time that in the still earlier history of science fiction magazines, payment of a quarter of a cent a word was common, and that not on publication but (the saying went) on lawsuit. Besides, those were lean times, and twenty-five dollars represented something like five monthsí pocket money to me (no kidding).
The editor of Future Fiction was, at that time, Charles D. Hornig. I occasionally visited his office to inquire when a story might appear, or when a check might, but I donít recall ever having found him in. In fact, to this day I have never, to my knowledge, met him.
Ring Around the Sun
Jimmy Turner was humming merrily, if a bit raucously, when he entered the reception room.
ìIs Old Sourpuss in?î he asked, accompanying the question with a wink at which the pretty secretary blushed gratefully.
ìHe is; and waiting for you.î She motioned him towards the door on which was written in fat, black letters, ìFrank McCutcheon, General Manager, United Space Mail.î
Jim entered. ìHello, Skipper, what now?î
ìOh, itís you, is it?î McCutcheon looked up from his desk, champing a foul-smelling stogie. ìSit down.î
McCutcheon stared at him from under bushy gray eyebrows. ìOld Sourpuss,î as he was euphoniously known to all members of United Space Mail, had never been known to laugh within the memory of the oldest inmate, though rumor did have it that when a child he had smiled at the sight of his father falling out of an apple-tree. Right now his expression made the rumor appear exaggerated.
ìNow, listen. Turner,î he barked, ìUnited Space Mail is inaugurating a new service and youíre elected to blaze the trail.î Disregarding Jimmyís grimace, he continued, ìFrom now on the Venerian mail is on an all-year-round basis.î
ìWhat! Iíve always thought that it was ruinous from a financial standpoint to deliver the Venerian. mail except when it was this side of the Sun.î
ìSure,î admitted McCutcheon, ìif we follow the ordinary routes. But we might cut straight across the system if we could only get near enough to the sun. Thatís where you come in! Theyíve put out a new ship equipped to approach within twenty million miles of the sun and which will be able to remain at that distance indefinitely.î
Jimmy interrupted nervously, ìWait a while, S-Mr. McCutcheon, I donít quite follow. What kind of a ship is this?î
ìHow do you expect me to know? Iím no fugitive from a laboratory. From what they tell me, it emits some kind of a field that bends the radiations of the sun around the ship. Get it? Itís all deflected. No heat reaches you. You can stay there forever and be cooler than in New York.î
ìOh, is that so?î Jimmy was skeptical. ìHas it been tested, or is that a little detail that has been left for me?î
ìItís been tested, of course, but not under actual solar conditions.î
ìThen itís out. Iíve done plenty for United, but this is the limit. Iím not crazy, yet.î
McCutcheon stiffened. ìMust I recall the oath you took upon entering the service. Turner? ëOur flight through space-í ì
ìë-must neíer be stopped by anything save death,íì finished Jimmy. ìI know that as well as you do and I also notice that itís very easy to quote that from a comfortable armchair. If youíre that idealistic, you can do it yourself. Itís still out, as far as Iím concerned. And if you want, you can kick me out. I can get other jobs just like that,î he snapped his fingers airily.
McCutcheonís voice dropped to a silky whisper. ìNow, now. Turner, donít be hasty. You havenít heard all I have to say yet. Roy Snead is to be your mate.î
ìHuh! Snead! Why, that four-flusher wouldnít have the guts to take a job like this in a million years. Tell me some other fairy tale.î
ìWell, as a matter of fact, he has already accepted. I thought you might accompany him, but I guess he was right. He insisted youíd back down. I thought at first you wouldnít.î
McCutcheon waved him away and bent his eyes unconcernedly on the report he had been scrutinizing at the time of Jimmyís entrance. Jimmy wheeled, hesitated, then returned.
ìWait a while, Mr. McCutcheon; do you mean to say that Roy is actually going?î McCutcheon nodded, still apparently absorbed in other matters, and Jimmy exploded, ìWhy, that low-down, spindle-shanked, dish-faced mug! So he thinks Iím too yellow to go! Well, Iíll show him. Iíll take the job and Iíll put up ten dollars to a Venerian nickel that he gets sick at the last minute.î
ìGood!î McCutcheon rose and shook hands, ìI thought youíd see reason. Major Wade has all the details. I think you leave in about six weeks and as Iím leaving for Venus tomorrow, youíll probably meet me there.î
Jimmy left, still boiling, and McCutcheon buzzed for the secretary. ìOh, Miss Wilson, get Roy Snead on the ëvisor.î
A few minutesí pause and then the red signal-light shone. The ëvisor was clicked on and the dark-haired, dapper Snead appeared on the visi-plate.
ìHello, Snead,î McCutcheon growled. ìYou lose that bet, Turner accepted that job. I thought heíd laugh himself sick when I told him you said he wouldnít go. Send over the twenty dollars, please.î
ìWait a while, Mr. McCutcheon,î Sneadís face was dark with fury, ìwhatís the idea of telling that punch-drunk imbecile Iím not going? You must have, you double-crosser. Iíll be there all right, but you can put up another twenty and Iíll bet he changes his mind yet. But /í// be there.î Roy Snead was still spluttering when McCutcheon clicked off.
The General Manager leaned back, threw away his mangled cigar, and lit a fresh one. His face remained sour, but there was a definite note of satisfaction in his tone when he said, ìHa! I thought that would get them.î
It was a tired and sweaty pair that blasted the good ship Helios across Mercuryís orbit. In spite of the perfunctory friendship enforced upon them by the weeks alone in space, Jimmy Turner and Roy Snead were scarcely on speaking terms. Add to this hidden hostility, the heat of the bloated sun and the torturing uncertainty of the final outcome of the trip and you have a miserable pair indeed.
Jimmy peered tiredly at the maze of dials confronting him, and, brushing a damp lock of hair from his eyes, grunted, ìWhatís the thermometer reading now, Roy?î
ìOne hundred twenty-five degrees Fahrenheit and still climbing,î was the growled response.
Jimmy cursed fluently, ìThe cooling system is on at maximum, the shipís hull reflects 95% of the solar radiation, and itís still in the hundred twenties.î He paused. ìThe gravometer indicates that weíre still some thirty-five million miles from the Sun. Fifteen millions miles to go before the Deflection Field becomes effective. The temperature will probably scale 150 yet. Thatís a sweet prospect! Check the desiccators. If the air isnít kept absolutely dry, weíre not going to last long.î
ìWithin Mercuryís orbit, think of it!î Sneadís voice was husky. ìNo one has ever been this close to the sun before. And weíre going closer yet.î
ìThere have been many this close and closer,î reminded Jimmy, ìbut they were out of control and landed in the sun. Friedlander, Debuc, Anton-î His voice trailed into a brooding silence,
Roy stirred uneasily. ìHow effective is this Deflection Field anyway, Jimmy? Your cheerful thoughts arenít very soothing, you know.î
ìWell, itís been tested under the harshest conditions laboratory technicians could devise. Iíve watched them. Itís been bathed in radiation approximating the sunís at a distance of twenty million. The Field worked like a charm. The light was bent about it so that the ship became invisible. The men inside the ship claimed that everything outside became invisible and that no heat reached them. A funny thing, though, the Field will work only under certain radiation strengths.î
ìWell, I wish it were over one way or the other,î Roy glowered. ìIf Old Sourpuss is thinking of making this my regular run-, well, heíll lose his ace pilot.î
ìHeíll lose his two ace pilots,î Jimmy corrected.
The two lapsed into silence and the Helios blasted on.
The temperature climbed: 130, 135, 140. Then, three days later, with the mercury quivering at 148, Roy announced that they were approaching the critical belt, the belt where the solar radiation reached sufficient intensity to energize the Field.
The two waited, minds at feverish concentration, pulses pounding.
ìWill it happen suddenly?î
ìI donít know. Weíll have to wait.î
From the portholes, only the stars were visible. The sun, three times the size as seen from Earth, poured its blinding rays upon opaque metal, for on this specially designed ship, portholes closed automatically when struck by powerful radiation.
And then the stars began disappearing. Slowly, at first, the dimmest faded-then the brighter ones: Polaris, Regulus, Arcturus, Sirius. Space was uniformly black.
ìItís working,î breathed Jimmy. The words were scarcely out of his mouth, when the sunward portholes clicked open. The sun was gone!
ìHa! I feel cooler already,î Jimmy Turner was jubilant. ìBoy, it worked like a charm. You know, if they could adjust this Deflection field to all radiation strengths, we would have perfected invisibility. It would make a convenient war weapon.î He lit a cigarette and leaned back luxuriously.
ìBut meanwhile weíre flying blind,î Roy insisted.
Jimmy grinned patronizingly, ìYou neednít worry about that, Dishface. Iíve taken care of everything. Weíre in an orbit about the sun. In two weeks, weíll be on the opposite side and then Iíll let the rockets blast and out of this band we go, zooming towards Venus.î He was very self-satisfied indeed.
ìJust leave it to Jimmy ëBrainsí Turner. Iíll have us through in two months, instead of the regulation six. Youíre with Unitedís ace pilot, now.î
Roy laughed nastily. ìTo listen to you, youíd think you did all the work. All youíre doing is to run the ship on the course Iíve plotted. Youíre the mechanic; Iím the brains.î
ìOh, is that so? Any damn pilot-school rookie can plot a course. It takes a man to navigate one.î
ìWell, thatís your opinion. Whoís paid more, though, the navigator or the course-plotter?î
Jimmy gulped on that one and Roy stalked triumphantly out of the pilot room. Unmindful of all this, the Helios blasted on.
For two days, all was serene; then, on the third day. Jimmy inspected the thermometer, scratched his head and looked worried. Roy entered, watched the proceedings and raised his eyebrows in surprise.
ìIs anything wrong?î He bent over and read the height of the thin, red column. ìJust 100 degrees. Thatís nothing to look like a sick goat over. From your expression, I thought something had gone wrong with the Deflection Field and that it was rising again,î he turned away with an ostentatious yawn.
ìOh, shut up, you senseless ape,î Jimmyís foot lifted in a half-hearted attempt at a kick. ìIíd feel a lot better if the temperature were rising. This Deflection Field is working a lot too good for my liking.î
ìHuh! What do you mean?î
ìIíll explain, and if you listen carefully you may understand me. This ship is built like a vacuum bottle. It gains heat only with the greatest of difficulty and loses it likewise.î He paused and let his words sink in. ìAt ordinary temperatures this ship is not supposed to lose more than two degrees a day if no outside sources of heat are supplied. Perhaps at the temperature at which we were, the loss might amount to five degrees a day. Do you get me?î
Royís mouth was open wide and Jimmy continued. ìNow this blasted ship has lost fifty degrees in less than three days.î
ìBut thatís impossible.î
ìThere it is.î Jimmy pointed ironically. ìIíll tell you whatís wrong. Itís that damn Field. It acts as a repulsive agent towards electromagnetic radiations and somehow is hastening the loss of heat of our ship.î
Roy sank into thought and did some rapid mental calculations. ìIf what you say is true,î he said at length, ìweíll hit freezing point in five days and then spend a week in what amounts to winter weather.î
ìThatís right. Even allowing for the decrease in heat-loss as the temperature is lowered, weíll probably end up with the mercury anywhere between thirty and forty below.î
Roy gulped unhappily. ìAnd at twenty million miles away from the sun!î
ìThat isnít the worst,î Jimmy pointed out. ìThis ship, like all others used for travel within the orbit of Mars, has no heating system. With the sun shining like fury and no way to lose heat except by ineffectual radiation, Mars and Venus space-ships have always specialized in cooling systems. We, for instance, have a very efficient refrigeration device.î
ìWeíre in a devil of a fix, then. The same applies to our space suits.î
In spite of the still roasting temperature, the two were beginning to experience a few anticipatory chills.
ìSay, Iím not going to stand this,î Roy burst out. ìI vote we get out of here right now and head for Earth. They canít expect more of us.î
ìGo ahead! Youíre the pilot. Can you plot a course at this distance from the sun and guarantee that we wonít fall into the sun?î
ìHell! I hadnít thought of that.î
The two were at their witsí end. Communication via radio had been impossible ever since they had passed Mercuryís orbit. The sun was at sunspot maximum and static had drowned out all attempts.
So they settled down to wait.
The next few days were taken up entirely with thermometer watching, with a few minutes taken out here and there when one of the two happened to think of an unused malediction to hurl at the head of Mr. Frank McCutcheon. Eating and sleeping were indulged in, but not enjoyed.
And meanwhile, the Helios , entirely unconcerned in the plight of its occupants, blasted on.
As Roy had predicted, the temperature passed the red line marked ìFreezingî towards the end of their seventh day in the Deflection Belt. The two were remarkably unhappy when this happened even though they had expected it.
Jimmy had drawn off about a hundred gallons of water from the tank. With this he had filled almost every vessel on board.
ìIt might,î he pointed out, ìsave the pipes from bursting when the water freezes. And if they do, as is probable, it is just as well that we supply ourselves with plenty of available water. We have to stay here another week, you know.î
And on the next day, the eighth, the water froze. There were the buckets, overflowing with ice, standing chill and bluecold. The two gazed at them forlornly. Jimmy broke one open.
ìFrozen solid,î he said bleakly and wrapped another sheet about himself.
It was hard to think of anything but the increasing cold now. Roy and Jimmy had requisitioned every sheet and blanket on the ship, after having put on three or four shirts and a like number of pairs of pants.
They kept in bed for as long as they were able, and when forced to move out, they huddled near the small oil-burner for warmth. Even this doubtful pleasure was soon denied them, for, as Jimmy remarked, ìthe oil supply is extremely limited and we will need the burner to thaw out the water and food.î
Tempers were short and clashes frequent, but the common misery kept them from actually jumping on each otherís throats. It was on the tenth day, however, that the two, united by a common hatred, suddenly became friends.
The temperature was hovering down near the zero point, making up its mind to descend into the minus regions. Jimmy was huddled in a corner thinking of the times back in New York when he had complained of the August heat and wondered how he could have done so. Roy, meanwhile, had manipulated numb fingers long enough to calculate that they would have to endure the coldness for exactly 6354 minutes more.
He regarded the figures with distaste and read them off to Jimmy. The latter Scowled and grunted, îThe way I feel, Iím not going to last 54 minutes, let alone 6354.î Then, impatiently, ìI wish you could manage to think of some way of getting us out of this.î
ìIf we werenít so near the sun,î suggested Roy, ìwe might start the rear blasts and hurry us up.î
ìYes, and if we landed in the sun, weíd be nice and warm. Youíre a big help!î
ìWell, youíre the one that calls himself ëBrainsí Turner. You think of something. The way you talk, youíd think all this was my fault.î
ìIt certainly is, you donkey in human clothing! My better judgment told me all along not to go on this fool trip. When McCutcheon proposed it, I refused pointblank. I know better.î Jimmy was very bitter. ìSo what happened? Like the fool you are, you accept and rush in where sensible men fear to tread. And then, of course. I naturally had to tag along.
ìWhy, do you know what I should have done,î Jimmyís voice ascended the scale, ìI should have let you go alone and freeze and then sat down by a roaring fire all by myself and gloated. That is, if I had known what was going to happen.î
A hurt and surprised look appeared on Royís face. ìIs that so? So thatís how it is! Well, all I can say is that you certainly have a genius for twisting facts, if for nothing else. The fact of the matter is that you were unutterably stupid enough to accept and I the poor fellow raked in by the force of circumstances.î
Jimmyís expression was one of the utmost disdain. ìEvidently the cold has driven you batty, though I admit it wouldnít take much to knock the little sense you possess out of you.î
ìListen,î Roy answered hotly. ìOn October 10th, McCutcheon called me up on the ëvisor and told me you had accepted and laughed at me for a yellow-belly for refusing to go. Do you deny that?î
ìYes, I do, and unconditionally. On October 10, Sourpass told me that you had decided to go and had bet him that-î
Jimmyís voice faded away very suddenly and a shocked look spread over his face. ìSay-, are you sure McCutcheon told you I had agreed to go?î
A chill, clammy feeling clutched at Royís heart when he caught Jimmyís drift, a feeling that drowned out the numbness of the cold.
ìAbsolutely,î he answered. ìIíll swear to that. Thatís why I went.î
ìBut he told me you had accepted and thatís why / went.î Jimmy felt very stupid all at once.
The two fell into a protracted and ominous silence which was broken at length by Roy, who spoke in a voice that quivered with emotion.
ìJimmy, weíve been the victims of a contemptible, dirty, lowdown, doublecrossing trick.î His eyes dilated with fury. ìWeíve been cheated, robbed-,î words failed him but he kept on uttering meaningless sounds, indicative mainly of devouring rage.
Jimmy was cooler, but none the less vindictive, ìYouíre right, Roy; McCutcheon has done us dirty. He has plumbed the depths of human iniquity. But weíll get even. When we get through in 6300 odd minutes, we will have a score to settle with Mr. McCutcheon.î
ìWhat are we going to do?î Royís eyes were filled with a bloodthirsty joy.
ìOn the spur of the moment, I suggest that we simply tear into him and rend him into tiny, little pieces.î
ìNot gruesome enough. How about boiling him in oil?î
ìThatís reasonable, yes; but it might take too long. Letís give him a good old-fashioned beating-with brass knuckles.î
Roy rubbed his hands. ìWeíll have lots of time to think up some really adequate measures. The dirty. God-forsaken, yellow-livered, leprous-î The rest verged fluently into the unprintable.
And for four more days, the temperature dove. It was on the fourteenth and last day that the mercury froze, the solid red shaft pointed its congealed finger at forty below.
On this terrible last day, they had lit the oil-burner, using their entire scanty supply of oil. Shivering and more than half frozen, they crouched close, attempting to extract every last drop of heat.
Jimmy had found a pair of ear-muffs several days before in some obscure corner, and it now changed hands at the end of every hour. Both sat buried under a small mountain of blankets, chafing chilled hands and feet. With every passing minute, their conversation, concerning McCutcheon almost exclusively, grew more vitriolic.
ìAlways quoting that triply-damned slogan of the Space Mail: ëOur flight through sp-í ì Jimmy choked with impotent fury.
ìYes, and always rubbing holes in chairs instead of coming out here and doing something like a manís work, the rotten so-and-so,î agreed Roy.
ìWell, weíre due to pass out of the deflection zone in two hours. Then three weeks and weíll be on Venus,î said Jimmy, sneezing.
ìThat canít be too soon for me,î answered Sneed, who had been sniffling for the last two days. ìIím never taking another space trip except maybe the one that takes me back to Earth. After this, I make my living growing bananas in Central America. A fellow can be decently warm out there at least.î
ìWe might not get off Venus, after what weíre going to do to McCutcheon.î
ìNo, youíre right there. But thatís all right. Venus is even warmer than Central America and thatís all I care about.î
ìWe have no legal worries either,î Jimmy sneezed again. ìOn Venus, life imprisonmentís the limit for first-degree murder. A nice,-warm dry cell for the rest of my life. What could be sweeter?î
The second hand on the chronometer whirled at its even pace; the minutes ticked off. Royís hands hovered lovingly over the lever that would set off the right rear blasts which would drive the Helios out away from the sun and from that terrible Deflection Zone.
And at last, ìGo!î shouted Jimmy eagerly. ìLet her blast!î
With a deep reverberating roar, the rockets fired. The Helios trembled from stem to stern. The pilots felt the acceleration press them back into their seats and were happy. In a matter of minutes, the sun would shine again and they would be warm, feel the blessed heat once more.
It happened before they were aware of it. There was a momentary flash of light and then a grinding and a click, as the sunward portholes closed.
ìLook,î cried Roy, ìthe stars! Weíre out of it!î He cast an ecstatically happy glance at the thermometer. ìWell, old boy, from now on we go up again.î He pulled the blankets about him closer, for the cold still lingered.
There were two men in Frank McCutcheonís office at the Venus branch of the United Space Mail: McCutcheon himself and the elderly, white-haired Zebulon Smith, inventor of the Deflection Field. Smith was talking.
ìBut Mr. McCutcheon, it is really of great importance that I learn exactly how my Deflection Field worked. Surely they have transmitted all possible information to you.î
McCutcheonís face was a study in dourness as he bit the edge off one of his two-for-five cigars and lit it.
ìThat, my dear Mr. Smith,î he said, ìis exactly what they did not do. Ever since they have receded far enough from the sun to render communication possible, I have been sending requests for information regarding the practicability of the Field. They just refuse to answer. They say it worked and that theyíre alive and that theyíll give the details when they reach Venus. Thatís all!î
Zebulon Smith sighed in disappointment. ìIsnít that a bit unusual; insubordination, so to speak? I thought they were required to be complete in their reports and to give any requested details.î
ìSo they are. But these are my ace pilots and rather temperamental. We have to extend some leeway. Besides, I tricked them into going on this trip, a very hazardous one, as you know, and so am inclined to be lenient.î
ìWell, then, I suppose I must wait.î
ìOh, it wonít be for long,î McCutcheon assured him. ìTheyíre due today, and I assure you that as soon as I get in touch with them, I shall send you the full details. After all, they survived for two weeks at a distance of twenty million miles from the sun, so your invention is a success. That should satisfy you.î
Smith had scarcely left when McCutcheonís secretary entered with a puzzled frown on her face.
ìSomething is wrong with the two pilots of the Helios , Mr. McCutcheon,î she informed him. ìI have just received a bulletin from Major Wade at Pallas City, where they landed. They have refused to attend the celebration prepared for them, but instead immediately chartered a rocket to come here, refusing to state the reason. When Major Wade tried to stop them, they became violent, he says.î She laid the communication down on his desk.
McCutcheon glanced at it perfunctorily. ìHmm! they do seem confoundedly temperamental. Well, send them to me when they come. Iíll snap them out of it.î
It was perhaps three hours later that the problem of the two misbehaving pilots again forced itself upon his mind, this time by a sudden commotion that had arisen in the reception room. He heard the deep angry tones of two men and then the shrill remonstrances of his secretary. Suddenly the door burst open and Jim Turner and Roy Snead strode in.
Roy coolly closed the door and planted his back against it.
ìDonít let anyone disturb me until Iím through,î Jimmy told him.
ìNo oneís getting through this door for a while,î Roy answered grimly, ìbut remember, you promised to leave some for me.î
McCutcheon said nothing during all this, but when he saw Turner casually draw a pair of brass knuckles from his pocket and put them on with a determined air, he decided that it was time to call a halt to the comedy.
ìHello, boys,î he said, with a heartiness unusual in him. ìGlad to see you again. Take a seat.î
Jimmy ignored the offer. ìHave you anything to say, any last request, before I start operations?î He gritted his teeth with an unpleasant scraping noise.
ìWell, if you put it that way,î said McCutcheon, ìI might ask exactly what this is all about-if Iím not being too unreasonable. Perhaps the Deflector was inefficient and you had a hot trip.î
The only answer to that was a loud snort from Roy and a cold stare on the part of Jimmy.
ìFirst,î said the latter, ìwhat was the idea of that filthy, disgusting cheat you pulled on us?î
McCutcheonís eyebrows raised in surprise. ìDo you mean the little white lies I told you in order to get you to go? Why, that was nothing. Common business practice, thatís all. Why, I pull worse things than that every day and people consider it just routine. Besides, what harm did it do you?î
ìTell him about our ëpleasant trip,í Jimmy,î urged Roy.
ìThatís exactly what Iím going to do,î was the response. He turned to McCutcheon and assumed a martyr-like air. ìFirst, on this blasted trip, we fried in a temperature that reached 150 but that was to be expected and weíre not complaining; we were half Mercuryís distance from the sun.
ìBut after that, we entered this zone where the light bends around us; incoming radiation sank to zero and we started losing heat and not just a degree a day the way we learned it in pilot school.î He paused to breathe a few novel curses he had just thought of, then continued.
ììIn three days, we were down to a hundred and in a week down to freezing. Then for one entire week, seven long days, we drove through our course at sub-freezing temperature. It was so cold the last day that the mercury froze.î Turnerís voice rose till it cracked, and at the door, a fit of self-pity caused Roy to catch his breath with an audible gulp. McCutcheon remained inscrutable.
Jimmy continued. ìThere we were without a heating system, in fact, no heat of any kind, not even any warm clothing. We froze, damn it; we had to thaw out our food and melt our water. We were stiff, couldnít move. It was hell, I tell you, in reverse temperature.î He paused, at a loss for words.
Roy Snead took up the burden. ìWe were twenty million miles away from the sun and I had a case of frost-bitten ears. Frost-bitten, I say.î He shook his fist viciously under McCutcheonís nose. ìAnd it was your fault. You tricked us into it! While we were freezing, we promised ourselves that weíd come back and get you and weíre going to keep that promise.î He turned to Jimmy. ìGo ahead, start it, will you? Weíve wasted enough time.î
ìHold it, hoys,î McCutcheon spoke at last. ìLet me get this straight. You mean to say that the Deflection Field worked so well that it kept all the radiation away and sucked out what heat there was in the ship in the first place?î Jimmy grunted a curt assent.
ìAnd you froze for a week because of that?î McCutcheon continued.
Again the grunt.
And then a very strange and unusual thing happened. McCutcheon, ìOld, Sourpuss,î the man without the ìrisusî muscle, smiled. He actually bared his teeth in a grin. And whatís more, the grin grew wider and wider until finally a rusty, long-unused chuckle was heard louder and louder, until it developed into a full-fledged laugh, and the laugh into a bellow. In one stentorian burst, McCutcheon made up for a lifetime of sour gloom.
The walls reverberated, the windowpanes rattled, and still the Homeric laughter continued. Roy and Jimmy stood openmouthed, entirely non-plussed. A puzzled bookkeeper thrust his head inside the door in a fit of temerity and remained frozen in his tracks. Others crowded about the door, conversing in awed whispers. McCutcheon had laughed!
Gradually, the risibilities of the old General Manager subsided. He ended in a fit of choking and finally turned a purple face towards his ace pilots, whose surprise had long since given way to indignation.
ìBoys,î he told them, ìthat was the best joke I ever heard. You can consider your pay doubled, both of you.î He was still grinning away like clockwork and had developed a beautiful case of hiccoughs.
The two pilots were left cold at the handsome proposal. ìWhatís so killingly funny?î Jimmy wanted to know, ìI donít see anything to laugh at, myself.î
McClutcheonís voice dripped honey, ìNow, fellows, before I left I gave each of you several mimeographed sheets containing special instructions. What happened to them?î
There was sudden embarrassment in the air.
ìI donít know. I must have mislaid mine,î gulped Roy.
ìI never looked at mine; I forgot about it.î Jimmy was genuinely dismayed.
ìYou see,î exclaimed McCutcheon triumphantly, ìit was all the fault of your own stupidity.î
ìHow do you figure that out?î Jimmy wanted to know. ìMajor Wade told us all we had to know about the ship, and besides, I guess thereís nothing you could tell us about running one.î
ìOh, isnít there? Wade evidently forgot to inform you of one minor point which you would have found on my instructions. The strength of the Deflection Field was adjustable. It happened to be set at maximum strength when you started, thatís all.î He was now beginning to chuckle faintly once more. ìNow, if you had taken the trouble to read the sheets, you would have known that a simple movement of a small lever,î he made the appropriate gesture with his thumb, ìwould have weakened the Field any desired amount and allowed as much radiation to leak through as was wanted.î
And now the chuckle was becoming louder. ìAnd you froze for a week because you didnít have the brains to pull a lever. And then you ace pilots come here and blame me. What a laugh!î and off he went again while a pair of very sheepish young men glanced askance at each other.
When McCutcheon came around to normal, Jimmy and Roy were gone.
Down in an alley adjoining the building, a little ten-year-old boy watched, with open mouth and intense absorption, two young men who were engaged in the strange and rather startling occupation of kicking each other alternately. They were vicious kicks, too.



***



When I wrote ìRing Around the Sunî I was much taken by the two protagonists. Turner and Snead. It was in my mind, I recall, to write other stories about the pair. This was a natural thought, for in the late 1930s there were a number of ìseriesî of stories about a given character or characters. Campbell himself had written some delightful stories featuring two men named Penton and Blake, and I longed to do a Penton-Blake imitation.
There was a practical value to writing a ìseries.î For one thing, you had a definite background that was carried on from story to story, so that half your work was done for you. Secondly, if the ìseriesî became popular, it would be difficult to reject new stories that fit into it.
I didnít make it with Turner and Snead. In fact, I never tried. The time was to come, two years later, when I was to have a pair of very similar characters, Powell and Donovan, who were to be in four stories and who were to be part of a very successful ìseriesî indeed.
By the end of August 1938, then, I had written five stories, of which three were eventually published. Not bad!
However, there followed a dry spell. I was finishing my third year of college and was trying, without success, to get admission into medical school. The situation in Europe was disturbing. It was the time of the surrender at Munich, and for a Jewish teen-ager there was something unsettling about the rapid, sure-fire victories of Hitler.
The next three stories took not one month, as had the previous three, but three months. And all were clearly well below the limits of salability even in the most permissive market. They were ìThe Weapon,î ìPaths of Destiny,î and ìKnossos in Its Glory.î Campbell rejected each one in very short order, and all made the rounds without luck. There came a time, nearly three years later, when Astonishing seemed interested in ìThe Weapon,î but that fell through and the other two didnít even come that close.
All three stories are now gone forever. I remember nothing at all about two of them, but ìKnossos in Its Gloryî was an ambitious attempt to retell the Theseus myth in science fiction terms. The minotaur was an extraterrestrial who landed in ancient Crete with only the kindliest of intentions, and I remember writing terribly stilted prose in an attempt to make my Cretans sound as I imagined characters in Homer ought to sound. Campbell, always kind, said in rejecting it that my work ìwas definitely improving, especially where I was not straining for effect.î
By the time I was writing ìKnossos in Its Gloryî I had just received my check for ìMarooned off Vestaî and I was a professional. My spirits rose accordingly, and toward the end of November I wrote ìAmmonium,î which was another attempt (like ìRing Around the Sunî) at humor.
I had a pretty good notion that Campbell wouldnít like it, however, and I never showed it to him. I sent it to Thrilling Wonder Stories instead. When they rejected it, I lost heart and retired it. It was only after Future Fiction had taken ìRing Around the Sunî that I thought I would chance this other one, too.
On August 23, 1939, I sent it in to Future Fiction , which took it, altering its name to ìThe Magnificent Possession.î








The Magnificent Possession


Walter Sills reflected now, as he had reflected often before, that life was hard and joyless. He surveyed his dingy chemical laboratory and grinned cynically-working in a dirty hole of a place, living on occasional ore analyses that barely paid for absolutely indispensable equipment, while others, not half his worth perhaps, were working for big industrial concerns and taking life easy.
He looked out the window at the Hudson River, ruddied in the flame of the dying sun, and wondered moodily whether these last experiments would finally bring him the fame and success he was after, or if they were merely some more false alarms.
The unlocked door creaked open a crack and the cheerful face of Eugene Taylor burst into view. Sills waved and Taylorís body followed his head and entered the laboratory.
ìHello, old soak,î came the loud and carefree hail. ìHow go things?î
Sills shook his head at the otherís exuberance. ìI wish I had your foolish outlook on life. Gene. For your information, things are bad. I need money, and the more I need it, the less I have.î
ìWell, I havenít any money either, have I?î demanded Taylor. ìBut why worry about it? Youíre fifty, and worry hasnít got you anything except a bald head. Iím thirty, and I want to keep my beautiful brown hair.î
The chemist grinned. ìIíll get my money yet. Gene. Just leave it to me.î
ìYour new ideas shaping out well?î
ìAre they? I havenít told you much about it, have I? Well, come here and Iíll show you what progress Iíve made.î
Taylor followed Sills to a small table, on which stood a rack of test tubes, in one of which was about half an inch of a shiny metallic substance.
ìSodium-mercury mixture, or sodium amalgam, as it is called,î explained Sills pointing to it.
He took a bottle labeled ìAmmonium Chloride Sol.î from the shelf and poured a little into the tube. Immediately the sodium amalgam began changing into a loosely-packed, spongy substance.
ìThat,î observed Sills, ìis ammonium amalgam. The ammonium radical (NH4) acts as a metal here and combines with mercury.î He waited for the action to go to completion and then poured off the supernatant liquid.
ìAmmonium amalgam isnít very stable,î he informed Taylor, ìso Iíll have to work fast.î He grasped a flask of straw-colored, pleasant-smelling liquid and filled the test-tube with it. Upon shaking, the loosely-packed ammonium amalgam vanished and in its stead a small drop of metallic liquid rolled about the bottom.
Taylor gazed at the test-tube, open-mouthed. ìWhat happened?î
ìThis liquid is a complex derivative of hydrazine which Iíve discovered and named Ammonaline. I havenít worked out its formula yet, but that doesnít matter. The point about it is that it has the property of dissolving the ammonium out of the amalgam. Those few drops at the bottom are pure mercury; the ammonium is in solution.î
Taylor remained unresponsive and Sills waxed enthusiastic. ìDonít you see the implications? Iíve gone half way towards isolating pure ammonium, a thing which has never been done before! Once accomplished it means fame, success, the Nobel Prize, and who knows what else.î
ìWow!î Taylorís gaze became more respectful. ìThat yellow stuff doesnít look so important to me.î He snatched for it, but Sills withheld it.
ìI havenít finished, by any means, Gene. Iíve got to get it in its free metallic state, and I canít do that so far. Every time I try to evaporate the Ammonaline, the ammonium breaks down to everlasting ammonia and hydrogenÖ But Iíll get it-Iíll get it!î
Two weeks later, the epilogue to the previous scene was enacted. Taylor received a hurried and emphatic call from his chemist friend and appeared at the laboratory in a flurry of anticipation.
ìYouíve got it?î
ìIíve got it-and itís bigger than I thought! Thereís millions in it, really,î Sillsí eyes shone with rapture.
ìIíve been working from the wrong angle up to now,î he explained. ìHeating the solvent always broke down the dissolved ammonium, so I separated it out by freezing. It works the same way as brine, which, when frozen slowly, freezes into fresh ice, the salt crystallizing out. Luckily, the Ammonaline freezes at 18 degrees Centigrade and doesnít require much cooling.î
He pointed dramatically to a small beaker, inside a glasswalled case. The beaker contained pale, straw-colored, needlelike crystals and, covering the top of this, a thin layer of a dullish, yellow substance.
ìWhy the case?î asked Taylor.
ìIíve got it filled with argon to keep the ammonium (which is the yellow substance on top of the Ammonaline) pure. It is so active that it will react with anything else but a helium-type gas.î
Taylor marveled and pounded his complacently-smiling friend on the back.
ìWait, Gene, the best is yet to come.î
Taylor was led to the other end of the room and Sillsí trembling finger pointed out another airtight case containing a lump of metal of a gleaming, yellow that sparkled and glistened.
ìThat, my friend, is ammonium oxide (NH420), formed by passing absolutely dry air over free ammonium metal. It is perfectly inert (the sealed case contains quite a bit of chlorine, for instance, and yet there is no reaction). It can be made as cheaply as aluminum, if not more so, and yet it looks more like gold than gold does itself. Do you see the possibilities?î
ìDo I?î exploded Taylor. ìIt will sweep the country. You can have ammonium jewelry, and ammonium-plated tableware, and a million other things. Then again, who knows how many countless industrial applications it may have? Youíre rich, Walt-youíre rich.î
ì Weíre rich,î corrected Sills gently. He moved towards the telephone, ìThe newspapers are going to hear of this. Iím going to begin to cash in on fame right now.î
Taylor frowned, ìMaybe youíd better keep it a secret, Walt.î
ìOh, Iím not breathing a hint as to the process. Iíll just give them the general idea. Besides, weíre safe; the patent application is in Washington right now.î
But Sills was wrong! The article in the paper ushered in a very, very hectic two days for the two of them.
J. Throgmorton Bankhead is what is commonly known as a ìcaptain of industry.î As head of the Acme Chromium and Silver Plating Corporation he no doubt deserved the title; but to his patient and long-suffering wife, he was merely a dyspeptic and grouchy husband, especially at the breakfast tableÖ and he was at the breakfast table now.
Rustling his morning paper angrily, he sputtered between bites of buttered toast, ëThis man is ruining the country.î He pointed aghast at big, black headlines. ìI said before and Iíll say again that the man is as crazy as a bedbug. He wonít be satisfiedÖî
ìJoseph, please,î pleaded his wife, ìyouíre getting purple in the face. Remember your high blood pressure. You know the doctor told you to stop reading the news from Washington if it annoys you so. Now, listen dear, about the cook. SheísÖî
ìThe doctorís a damn fool, and so are you,î shouted J. Throgmorton Bankhead. ìIíll read all the news I please and get purple in the face too, if I want to.î
He raised the cup of coffee to his mouth and took a critical sip. While he did so, his eyes fell upon a more insignificant headline towards the bottom of the page: ìSavant Discovers Gold Substitute.î The coffee cup remained in the air while he scanned the article quickly. ìThis new metal,î it ran in part, ìis claimed by its discoverer to be far superior to chromium, nickel, or silver for cheap and beautiful jewelry. The twenty-dollar-a-week clerk,í said Professor Sills, ëwill eat off ammonium plate more impressive in appearance than the gold plate of the Indian Nabob.í There is noÖî
But J. Throgmorton Bankhead had stopped reading. Visions of a ruined Acme Chromium and Silver Plating Corporation danced before his eyes; and as they danced, the cup of coffee dropped from his hand, and splashed hot liquid over his trousers.
His wife rose to her feet in alarm, ìWhat is it, Joseph; what is it?î
ìNothing,î Bankhead shouted. ìNothing. For Godís sake, go away, will you?î
He strode angrily out of the room, leaving his wife to search the paper for anything that could have disturbed him.
ìBobís Tavernî on Fifteenth Street is usually pretty well filled at all times, but on the morning we are speaking of, it was empty except for four or five rather poorly-dressed men who clustered about the portly and dignified form of Peter Q. Hornswoggle, eminent ex-Congressman.
Peter Q. Hornswoggle was, as usual, speaking fluently. His subject, again as usual, concerned the life of a Congressman.
ìI remember a case in point,î he was saying, ìwhen that same argument was brought up in the House, and which I answered as follows: The eminent gentleman from Nevada in his statements overlooks one very important aspect of the problem. He does not realize that it is to the interest of the entire nation that the apple-parers of this country be attended to promptly; for, gentlemen, on the welfare of the apple-parers depends the future of the entire fruit industry and on the fruit-industry is based the entire economy of this great and glorious nation, the United States of America.í ì
Hornswoggle paused, swallowed half a pint of beer at once, and then smiled in triumph, ìI have no hesitation in saying, gentlemen, that at that statement, the entire House burst into wild and tumultuous applause.î
One of the assembled listeners shook his head slowly and marvelled. ìIt must be great to be able to spiel like that, Senator. You musta been a sensation.î
ìYeah,î agreed the bartender, ìitís a dirty shame you were beat last election.î
The ex-Congressman winced and in a very dignified tone began, ìI have been reliably informed that the use of bribery in that campaign reached unprecedented propÖî His voice died away suddenly as he caught sight of a certain article in the newspaper of one of his listeners. He snatched at it and read it through in silence and thereupon his eyes gleamed with a sudden idea.
ìMy friends,î he said turning to them again, ìI find I must leave you. There is pressing work that must be done immediately at City Hall.î He leant over to whisper to the barkeeper, ìYou havenít got twenty-five cents, have you? I find I left my wallet in the Mayorís office by mistake. I will surely repay you tomorrow.î
Clutching the quarter, reluctantly given, Peter Q. Hornswoggle left.
In a small and dimly lit room somewhere in the lower reaches of First Avenue, Michael Maguire, known to the police by the far more euphonious name of Mike the Slug, cleaned his trusty revolver and hummed a tuneless song. The door opened a crack and Mike looked up.
ìThat you, Slappy?î
ìYeh,î a short, wizened person sidled in, ìI brung ye de eveniní sheet. De cops are still tinkiní Bragoni pulled de job.î
ìYeh? Thatís good.î He bent unconcernedly over the revolver. ìAnything else doing?î
ìNaw! Some dippy dame killed herself, but datís all.î
He tossed the newspaper to Mike and left. Mike leaned back and flipped the pages in a bored manner.
A headline attracted his eye and he read the short article that followed. Having finished, he threw aside the paper, lit a cigarette, and did some heavy thinking. Then he opened the door.
ìHey, Slappy, címere. Thereís a job thatís got to be done.î
Walter Sills was happy, deliriously so. He walked about his laboratory king of all he surveyed, strutting like a peacock, basking in his new-found glory. Eugene Taylor sat and watched him, scarcely less happy himself.
ìHow does it feel to be famous?î Taylor wanted to know.
ìLike a million dollars; and thatís what Iím going to sell the secret of ammonium metal for. Itís the fat of the land for me from now on.î
ìYou leave the practical details to me, Walt. Iím getting in touch with Staples of Eagle Steel today. Youíll get a decent price from him.î
The bell rang, and Sills jumped. He ran to open the door.
ìIs this the home of Walter Sills?î The large, scowling visitor gazed about him superciliously.
ìYes, Iím Sills. Do you wish to see me?î
ìYes. My name is J. Throgmorton Bankhead and I represent the Acme Chromium and Silver Plating Corporation. I would like to have a momentís discussion with you.î
ìCome right in. Come right in! This is Eugene Taylor, my associate. You may speak freely before him.î
ìVery well.î Bankhead seated himself heavily. ìI suppose you surmise the reason for my visit.î
ìI take it that you have read of the new ammonium metal in the papers.î
ìThatís right. I have come to see whether there is any truth in the story and to buy your process if there is.î
ìYou can see for yourself, sir,î Sills led the magnate to where the argon-filled container of the few grams of pure ammonium were. ìThat is the metal. Over here to the right, Iíve got the oxide, an oxide which is more metallic than the metal itself, strangely enough. It is the oxide that is what the papers call ësubstitute gold.í ì
Bankheadís face showed not an atom of the sinking feeling within him as he viewed the oxide with dismay. ìTake it out in the open,î he said, ìand letís see it.î
Sills shook his head. ìI canít, Mr. Bankhead. Those are the first samples of ammonium and ammonium-oxide that ever existed. Theyíre museum pieces. I can easily make more for you, if you wish.î
ìYouíll have to, if you expect me to sink my money in it You satisfy me and Iíll be willing to buy your patent for as much as-oh, say a thousand dollars.î
ìA thousand dollars!î exclaimed Sills and Taylor together.
ìA very fair price, gentlemen.î
ìA million would be more like it,î shouted Taylor in an outraged tone. ìThis discovery is a goldmine.î
ìA million, indeed! You are dreaming, gentlemen. The fact of the matter is that my company has been on the track of ammonium for years now, and we are just at the point of solving the problem. Unfortunately you beat us by a week or so, and so I wish to buy up your patent in order to save my company a great deal of annoyance. You realize, of course, that if you refuse my price, I could just go ahead and manufacture the metal, using my own process.î
ìWeíll sue if you do,î said Taylor.
ìHave you got the money for a long, protracted-and expensive-lawsuit?î Bankhead smiled nastily. ìI have, you know. To prove, however, that I am not unreasonable, I will make the price two thousand.î
ìYouíve heard our price,î answered Taylor stonily, ìand we have nothing further to say.î
ìAll right, gentlemen,î Bankhead walked towards the door, ìthink it over. Youíll see it my way, Iím sure.î
He opened the door and revealed the symmetrical form of Peter Q. Hornswoggle bent in rapt concentration at the keyhole. Bankhead sneered audibly and the ex-Congressman jumped to his feet in consternation, bowing rapidly two or three times, for want of anything better to do.
The financier passed by disdainfully and Hornswoggle entered, slammed the door behind him, and faced the two bewildered friends.
ìThat man, my dear sirs, is a malefactor of great wealth, an economic royalist. He is the type of predatory interest that is the ruination of this country. You did quite right in refusing his offer.î He placed his hand on his ample chest and smiled at them benignantly.
ìWho the devil are you?î rasped Taylor, suddenly recovering from his initial surprise.
ìI?î Hornswoggle was taken aback. ìWhy-er-I am Peter Quintus Hornswoggle. Surely you know me. I was in the House of Representatives last year.î
ìNever heard of you. What do you want?î
ìWhy, bless me! I read in the papers of your wonderful discovery and have come to place my services at your feet.î
ìWhat services?î
ìWell, after all, you two are not men of the world. With your new invention, you are prey for every self-seeking unscrupulous person that comes along-like Bankhead, for instance. Now, a practical man of affairs, such as I, one with experience of the world, would be of inestimable use to you. I could handle your affairs, attend to details, see that-î
ìAll for nothing, of course, eh?î Taylor asked, sardonically.
Hornswoggle coughed convulsively. ìWell, naturally, I thought that a small interest in your discovery might fittingly be assigned to me.î
Sills, who had remained silent during all this, rose to his feet suddenly. ìGet out of here! Did you hear me? Get out, before I call the police.î
ìNow, Professor Sills, pray donít get excited,î Hornswoggle retreated towards the door which Taylor held open for him. He passed out, still protesting, and swore softly to himself when the door slammed in his face.
Sills sank wearily into the nearest chair. ìWhat are we to do, Gene? He offers only two thousand. A week ago that would have been beyond anything I could have hoped for, but now-î
ìForget it. The fellow was only bluffing. Listen, Iím going right now to call on Staples. Weíll sell to him for what we can get (it ought to be plenty) and then if thereís any trouble with Bankhead-well, thatís Staplesí worry.î He patted the other on the shoulder. ìOur troubles are practically over.î
Unfortunately, however, Taylor was wrong; their troubles were only beginning.
Across the street, a furtive figure, with beady eyes peering from upturned coat-collar, surveyed the house carefully. A curious policeman might have identified him as ìSlappyî Egan if he had bothered to look, but no one did and ìSlappyî remained unmolested.
ìCripes,î he muttered to himself, ìdis is gonna be a cinch. De whole woiks on ëthe bottom floor, back window can be jimmied wid a tootípick, no alarms, no nuttiní.î He chuckled and walked away.
Nor was ìSlappyî alone with his ideas. Peter Q. Hornswoggle, as he walked away, found strange thoughts wandering through his massive cranium-thoughts which involved a certain amount of unorthodox action.
And J. Throgmorton Bankhead was likewise active. Belonging to that virile class known as ìgo-gettersî and being not at all scrupulous as to how he ìgo-got,î and certainly not intending to pay a million dollars for the secret of Ammonium, he found it necessary to call on a certain one of his acquaintances.
This acquaintance, while a very useful one, was a bit unsavory, and Bankhead found it advisable to be very careful and cautious while visiting him. However, the conversation that ensued ended in a pleasing manner for both of them.
Walter Sills snapped out of an uneasy sleep with startled suddenness. He listened anxiously for a while and then leaned over and nudged Taylor. He was rewarded by a few incoherent snuffles.
ìGene, Gene, wake up! Come on, get up!î
ìEh? What is it? What are you bothering-î
ìShut up! Listen, do you hear it?î
ìI donít hear anything. Leave me alone, will you?î
Sills put his finger on his lips, and the other quieted. There was a distinct shuffling noise down below, in the laboratory.
Taylorís eyes widened and sleep left them entirely. ìBurglars!î he whispered.
The two crept out of bed, donned bathrobe and slippers, and tiptoed to the door. Taylor had a revolver and took the lead in descending the stairs.
They had traversed perhaps half the flight, when there was a sudden, surprised shout from below, followed by a series of loud, threshing noises. This continued for a few moments and then there was a loud crash of glassware.
ìMy ammonium!î cried Sills in a stricken voice and rushed head-long down the stairs evading Taylorís clutching arms.
The chemist burst into the laboratory, followed closely by his cursing associate, and clicked the lights on. Two struggling figures bunked owlishly in the sudden illumination, and separated.
Taylorís gun covered them. ìWell, isnít this nice,î he said.
One of the two lurched to his feet from amid a tangle of broken beakers and flasks, and, nursing a cut on his wrist, bent his portly body in a still dignified bow. It was Peter Q. Hornswoggle.
ìNo doubt,î he said, eyeing the unwavering firearm nervously, ìthe circumstances seem suspicious, but I can explain very easily. You see, in spite of the very rough treatment I received after having made my reasonable proposal, I still felt a great deal of kindly interest in you two.
ìTherefore, being a man of the world, and knowing the iniquities of mankind, I just decided to keep an eye on your house tonight, for I saw you had neglected to take precautions against house-breakers. Judge my surprise to see this dastardly creature,î he pointed to the flat-nosed, plug-ugly, who still remained on the floor in a daze, ìcreeping in at the back window.
ìImmediately, I risked life and limb in following the criminal, attempting desperately to save your great discovery. I really feel I deserve great credit for what I have done. Iím sure you will feel that I am a valuable person to deal with and reconsider your answers to my earlier proposals.î
Taylor listened to all this with a cynical smile. ìYou can certainly lie fluently, canít you P.Q.?î
He would have continued at greater length and with greater forcefulness had not the other burglar suddenly raised his voice in loud protest ìCripes, boss, dis fat slob here is only tryiní to get me in bad. Iím just followiní orders, boss. A fellow hired me to come in here and rifle the safe and Iím just oininí a bit oí honest money. Just plain safe-crackiní, boss, I ainít out to hurt no one.
ìDen, just as I was gettiní down to de job-wanniní up, so to say-in crawls dis little guy wid a chisel and blowtorch and makes for de safe. Well, naturally, I donít like no competition, so I lays for him and then-î
But Hornswoggle had drawn himself up in icy hauteur. ìIt remains to be seen whether the word of a gangster is to be taken before the word of one, who, I may truthfully say, was, in his time, one of the most eminent members of the great-î
ìQuiet, both of you,î shouted Taylor, waving the gun threateningly. ìIím calling the police and you can annoy them with your stories. Say, Walt, is everything all right?î
ìI think so!î Sills returned from his inspection of the laboratory. ìThey only knocked over empty glassware. Everything else is unharmed.î
ìThatís good,î Taylor began, and then choked in dismay.
From the hallway, a cool individual, hat drawn well over his eyes, entered. A revolver; expertly handled, changed the situation considerably.
ìO. K.,î he grunted at Taylor, ìdrop the gat!î The otherís weapon slipped from reluctant fingers and hit the floor with a clank.
The new menace surveyed the four others with a sardonic glance. ìWell! So there were two others trying to beat me to it This seems to be a very popular place.î
Sills and Taylor stared stupidly, while Hornswoggleís teeth chattered energetically. The first mobster moved back uneasily, muttering as he did so, ìFor Peteís sake, itís Mike the Slug.î
ìYeah,î Mike rasped, ìMike the Slug. Thereís lots of guys who know me and who know I ainít afraid to pull the trigger anytime I feel like. Come on, Baldy, hand over the works. You know-the stuff about your fake gold. Come on, before I count five.î
Sills moved slowly toward the old safe in the corner. Mike stepped back carelessly to give him room, and in so doing, his coat sleeve brushed against a shelf. A small vial of sodium sulphate solution tottered and fell.
With sudden inspiration. Sills yelled, ìMy God, watch out! Itís nitroglycerine!î
The vial hit the floor with a smashing tinkle of broken glass, and involuntarily, Mike yelled and jumped in wild dismay. And as he did so, Taylor crashed into him with a beautiful flying tackle. At the same time. Sills lunged for Taylorís fallen weapon to cover the other two. For this, however, there was no longer need. At the very beginning of the confusion, both had faded hurriedly into the night from whence they came.
Taylor and Mike the Slug rolled round and round the laboratory floor, locked in desperate struggle while Sills hopped over and about them, praying for a moment of comparative quiet that he might bring the revolver into sharp and sudden contact with the gangsterís skull.
But no such moment came. Suddenly Mike lunged, caught Taylor stunningly under the chin, and jerked free. Sills yelled in consternation and pulled the trigger at the fleeing figure. The shot was wild and Mike escaped unharmed. Sills made no attempt to follow.
A sluicing stream of cold water brought Taylor back to his senses. He shook his head dazedly as he surveyed the surrounding shambles.
ìWhew!î he said, ìwhat a night!î
Sills groaned, ìWhat are we going to do now. Gene? Our very lives are in danger. I never thought of the possibility of thieves, or I would never have told of the discovery to the newspapers.î
ìOh, well, the harmís done; no use weeping over it Now, listen, the first thing we have to do now is to get back to sleep. They wonít bother us again tonight Tomorrow youíll go to the bank and put the papers outlining the details of the process in the vault (which you should have done long ago). Staples will be here at 3 p.m.; well close the deal, and then, at least, weíll live happily ever after.î
The chemist shook his head dolefully. ìAmmonium has certainly proved to be very upsetting so far. I almost wish I had never heard of it Iíd almost rather be back doing ore analysis.î
As Walter Sills rattled cross-town towards his bank, he found no reason to change his wish. Even the comforting and homely jiggling of his ancient and battered automobile failed to cheer him. From a life characterized by peaceful monotony, he had entered a period of bedlam, and he was not at all satisfied with the change.
ìRiches, like poverty, has its own peculiar problems,î he remarked sententiously to himself as he braked the car before the two-story, marble edifice that was the bank. He stepped out carefully, stretched his cramped legs, and headed for the revolving door.
He didnít get there right away, though. Two husky specimens of the human race stepped up, one at each side, and Sills felt a very hard object pressing with painful intensity against his ribs. He opened his mouth involuntarily, and was rewarded by an icy voice in his ears, ìQuiet, Baldy, or youíll get what you deserve for the damn trick you pulled on me last night.î
Sills shivered and subsided. He recognized Mike the Slugís voice very easily.
ìWhereís the details?î asked Mike, ìand make it quick.î
ìInside jacket pocket,î croaked Sills tremulously.
Mikeís companion passed his hand dexterously into the indicated pocket and flicked out three or four folded sheets of foolscap.
ìDat it, Mike?î
A hasty appraisal and a nod, ìYeh, we got it. All right, Baldy, on your way!î A sudden shove and the two gangsters jumped into their car and drove away rapidly, while the chemist sprawled on the sidewalk. Kindly hands raised him up.
ìItís all right,î he managed to gasp. ìI just tripped, thatís all. Iím not hurt.î He found himself alone again, passed into the bank, and dropped into the nearest bench, in near-collapse. There was no doubt about it; the new life was not for him.
But he should have been prepared for it. Taylor had foreseen a possibility of this sort of thing happening. He, himself, had thought a car had been trailing him. Yet, in his surprise and fright, he had almost ruined everything.
He shrugged his thin shoulders and, taking off his hat, abstracted a few folded sheets of paper from the sweatband. It was the work of five minutes to deposit them in a vault, and see the immensely strong steel door swing shut. He felt relieved.
ìI wonder what theyíll do,î he muttered to himself on the way home, ìwhen they try to follow the instructions on the paper they did get.î He pursed his lips and shook his head. ìIf they do, thereís going to be one heck of an explosion.î
Sills arrived home to find three policemen pacing leisurely up and down the sidewalk in front of the house.
ìPolice guard,î explained Taylor shortly, ìso that we have no more trouble like last night.î
The chemist related the events at the bank and Taylor nodded grimly. ìWell, itís checkmate for them now. Staples will be here in two hours, and until then the police will take care of things. Afterwards,î he shrugged, ìit will be Staplesí affair.î
ìListen, Gene,î the chemist put in suddenly, ìIím worried about the ammonium. I havenít tested its plating abilities and those are the most important things, you know. What if Staples comes, and we find that all we have is pigeon milk.î
ìHmm,î Taylor stroked his chin, ìyouíre right there. But Iíll tell you what we can do. Before Staples comes, letís plate something-a spoon, suppose-for our own satisfaction.î
ìItís really very annoying,î Sills complained fretfully. ìIf it werenít for these troublesome hooligans, we wouldnít have to proceed in this slipshod and unscientific manner.î
ìWell, letís eat dinner firstî
After the mid-day meal, they began. The apparatus was set up in feverish haste. In a cubic vat, a foot each way, a saturated solution of Ammonaline was poured. An old, battered spoon was the cathode and a mass of ammonium amalgam (separated from the rest of the solution by a perforated glass partition) was the anode. Three batteries in series provided the current.
Sills explained animatedly, ìIt works on the same principle as ordinary copper plating. The ammonium ion, once the electric current is run through, is attracted to the cathode, which-is in the spoon. Ordinarily it would break up, being unstable, but this is not the case when it is dissolved in Ammonaline. This Ammonaline is itself very slightly ionized and oxygen is given off at the anode.
ìThis much I know from theory. Let us see what happens in practice.î
He closed the key while Taylor watched with breathless interest. For a moment, no effect was visible. Taylor looked disappointed.
Then Sills grasped his sleeve. ìSee!î he hissed. ìWatch the anode!î
Sure enough, bubbles of gas were slowly forming upon the spongy ammonium amalgam. They shifted their attention to the spoon.
Gradually, they noticed a change. The metallic appearance became dulled, the silver color slowly losing its whiteness. A layer of distinct, if dull, yellow was being built up. For fifteen minutes, the current ran and then Sills broke the circuit with a contented sigh.
ìIt plates perfectly,î he said.
ìGood! Take it out! Letís see it!î
ìWhat?î Sills was aghast. ëTake it out! Why, thatís pure ammonium. If I were to expose it to ordinary air, the water vapor would dissolve it to NH4OH in no time. We canít do that.î
He dragged a rather bulky piece of apparatus to the table. ìThis,î he said, ìis a compressed-air container. I run it through calcium chloride dryers and then bubble the perfectly dry oxygen (safely diluted with four times its own volume of nitrogen) directly into the solvent.î
He introduced the nozzle into the solution just beneath the spoon and turned on a slow stream of air. It worked like magic. With almost lightning speed, the yellow coating began to glitter and gleam, to shine with almost ethereal beauty.
The two men watched it with beating heart and panting breath. Sills shut the air off, and for a while they watched the wonderful spoon and said nothing.
Then Taylor whispered hoarsely, ìTake it out. Let me feel it! My God!-itís beautiful!î
With reverent awe, Sills approached the spoon, grasped it with forceps, and withdrew it from the surrounding liquid.
What followed immediately after that can never be fully described. Later on, when excited newspaper reporters pressed them unmercifully, neither Taylor nor Sills had the least recollection of the happenings of the next few minutes.
What happened was that the moment the ammoniumplated spoon was exposed to open air, the most horrible odor ever conceived assailed their nostrils!-an odor that cannot be described, a terrible broth of Hell that plunged the room into sheer, horrible nightmare.
With one strangled gasp. Sills dropped the spoon. Both were coughing and retching, tearing wildly at their throats and mouths, yelling, weeping, sneezing!
Taylor pounced upon the spoon and looked about wildly. The odor grew steadily more powerful and their wild exertions to escape it had already succeeded in wrecking the laboratory and had upset the vat of Ammonaline. There was only one thing to do, and Sills did it. The spoon went flying out the open window in the middle of Twelfth Avenue. It hit the sidewalk right at the feet of one of the policemen, but Taylor didnít care.
ìTake off your clothes. Weíll have to burn them,î Sills was gasping. ìThen spray something over the laboratory-anything with a strong smell. Burn sulphur. Get some liquid Bromine.î
Both were tearing at their clothes in distraction when they realized that someone had walked in through the unlocked door. The bell had rung, but neither had heard it. It was Staples, six-foot, lion-maned Steel King.
One step into the hall ruined his dignity utterly. He collapsed in one tearing sob and Twelfth Avenue was treated to the spectacle of an elderly, richly-dressed gentleman tearing uptown as fast as his feet would carry him, shedding as much of his clothes as he dared while doing so.
The spoon continued its deadly work. The three policemen had long since retired in abject rout, and now to the numbed and tortured senses of the two innocent and suffering causes of the entire mess came a roaring and confused shouting from the street
Men and women were pouring out of the neighboring houses, horses were bolting. Fire engines clanged down the street, only to be abandoned by their riders. Squadrons of police came-and left.
Sills and Taylor finally gave up, and clad only in trousers, ran pell-mell for the Hudson. They did not stop until they found themselves neck-deep in water, with blessed, pure air above them.
Taylor turned bewildered eyes to Sills. ìBut how could it emit that horrible odor? You said it was stable and stable solids have no odors. It takes vapor for that, doesnít it?î
ìHave you ever smelled musk?î groaned Sills. ìIt will give off an aroma for an indefinite period without losing any appreciable weight. Weíve come up against something like that.î
The two ruminated in silence for a while, wincing whenever the wind brought a vagrant waft of Ammonium vapor to them, and then Taylor said in a low voice, ìWhen they finally trace the trouble to the spoon, and find out who made it, Iím afraid weíll be sued-or maybe thrown in jail.î
Sillsí face lengthened. ìI wish Iíd never seen the damned stuff! Itís brought nothing but trouble.î His tortured spirit gave way and he sobbed loudly.
Taylor patted him on the back mournfully. ìItís not as bad as all that, of course. The discovery will make you famous and youíll be able to demand your own price, working at any industrial lab in the country. Then, too, youíre a cinch to win the Nobel Prize.î
ìThatís right,î Sills smiled again, ìand I may find a way to counteract the odor, too. I hope so.î
ìI hope so, too,î said Taylor feelingly. ìLetís go back. I think theyíve managed to remove the spoon by now.î



***



It should be quite obvious to anyone reading ìThe Magnificent Possessionî that I was majoring in chemistry in college at the time. As supposed humor, it is much more embarrassing on rereading than ìRing Around the Sunî is. Imagine having a Congressman named ìHornswoggleî and having gangsters speak in a ridiculous, misspelled version of Brooklyn slang.
ìThe Magnificent Possessionî was the only one of the first nine stories I wrote that Campbell never saw, and Iím glad of that.
In early December I wrote a story I called ìAd Astra,î and on December 21, 1938 (my fatherís forty-second birthday, though I donít recall thinking of it as an omen one way or the other), I went in to submit it to Campbell. It was my seventh visit to his office, for I had not yet missed a month, and it was the ninth story I submitted to him.
ìAd Astraî is the first story I wrote for which I remember, even after all this time, the exact circumstances of the initiating inspiration. That fall, I applied for and received a National Youth Administration (NYA) job designed to help me through college. I received fifteen dollars a month, if memory serves me, in return for a few hours of typing. The typing I did was for a sociologist who was writing a book on the subject of social resistance to technological innovation. This included everything from the resistance of the early Mesopotamian priesthood to the dissemination of the knowledge of reading and writing among the general population, down to objections to the airplane by those who said heavier-than-air flight was impossible.
Naturally it occurred to me that a story might be written in which social resistance to space flight might play a small part. It was because of that that I used ìAd Astraî as the title. This was from the Latin proverb ìPer aspera ad astraî (ìThrough difficulties to the starsî).
For the first time, Campbell did more than simply send a rejection. On December 29, I received a letter from him asking me to come in for a conference to discuss the story in detail.
On January 5, 1939, I went to see Campbell for the eighth time-and for the first time at his specific request. It turned out that what he liked in the story was the social resistance to space flight-the space flight itself was, of course, run of the mill.
Rather daunted, for I had never before had to revise a story to meet editorial specification, I went to work. I brought in the revised story on January 24, and on January 31 I discovered the system used by Campbell in accepting stories. Though his rejections were usually accompanied by long and useful letters, his acceptances consisted of a check only, without a single accompanying word. It was his feeling that the check was eloquent enough. In this case it was for sixty-nine dollars, since the story was 6,900 words long and Campbell paid one cent a word in those days.
It was my first sale to Campbell, after seven months of trying and after eight consecutive rejections. The story appeared half a year later, and I then found that Campbell had changed the title (on the whole justifiably, I think) to ìTrends.î








Trends


John Harman was sitting at his desk, brooding, when I entered the office that day. It had become a common sight, by then, to see him staring out at the Hudson, head in hand, a scowl contorting his face-all too common. It seemed unfair for the little bantam to be eating his heart out like that day after day, when by rights he should have been receiving the praise and adulation of the world.
I flopped down into a chair. ìDid you see the editorial in todayís Clarion , boss?î
He turned weary, bloodshot eyes to me. ìNo, I havenít. What do they say? Are they calling the vengeance of God down upon me again?î His voice dripped with bitter sarcasm.
ìTheyíre going a little farther now, boss,î I answered. ìListen to this:
ìëTomorrow is the day of John Harmanís attempt at profaning the heavens. Tomorrow, in defiance of world opinion and world conscience, this man will defy God.
ìíIt is not given to man to go wheresoever ambition and desire lead him. There are things forever denied him, and aspiring to the stars is one of these. Like Eve, John Harman wishes to eat of the forbidden fruit, and like Eve he will suffer due punishment therefor.
ìëBut it is not enough, this mere talk. If we allow him thus to brook the vengeance of God, the trespass is mankindís and not Harmanís alone. In allowing him to carry out his evil designs, we make ourselves accessory to the crime, and Divine vengeance will fall on all alike.
ìëIt is, therefore, essential that immediate steps be taken to prevent Harman from taking off in his so-called rocketship tomorrow. The government in refusing to take such steps may force violent action. If it will make no move to confiscate the rocketship, or to imprison Harman, our enraged citizenry may have to take matters into their own hands-íì
Harman sprang from his seat in a rage and, snatching the paper from my hands, threw it into the corner furiously. ìItís an open call to a lynching,î he raved. ìLook at this!î
He cast five or six envelopes in my direction. One glance sufficed to tell what they were.
ìMore death threats?î I ëasked.
ìYes, exactly that. Iíve had to arrange for another increase in the police patrol outside the building and for motorcycle police escort when I cross the river to the testing ground tomorrow.î
He marched up and down the room with agitated stride. ìI donít know what to do, Clifford. Iíve worked on the Prometheus almost ten years. Iíve slaved, spent a fortune of money, given up all that makes life worth while-and for what? So that a bunch of fool revivalists can whip up public sentiment against me until my very life isnít safe.î
ìYouíre in advance of the times, boss,î I shrugged my shoulders in a resigned gesture which made him whirl upon me in a fury.
ìWhat do you mean ëin advance of the timesí? This is 1973. The world has been ready for space travel for half a century now. Fifty years ago, people were talking, dreaming of the day when man could free himself of Earth and plumb the depths of space. For fifty years, science has inched toward, this goal, and nowÖ now I finally have it, and behold! you say the world is not ready for me.î
ìThe ë20s and ë30s were years of anarchy, decadence, and misrule, if you remember your history,î I reminded him gently. ìYou cannot accept them as criteria.î
ìI know, I know. Youíre going to tell me of the First War of 1914, and the Second of 1940. Itís an old story to me; my father fought in the Second and my grandfather in the First. Nevertheless, those were the days when science flourished. Men were not afraid then; somehow they dreamed and dared. There was no such thing as conservatism when it came to matters mechanical and scientific. No theory was too radical to advance, no discovery too revolutionary to publish. Today, dry rot has seized the world when a great vision, such as space travel, is hailed as ëdefiance of God.í ì
His head sank slowly down, and he turned away to hide his trembling lips and the tears in his eyes. Then he suddenly straightened again, eyes blazing: ìBut Iíll show them. Iím going through with it, in spite of Hell, Heaven and Earth. Iíve put too much into it to quit now.î
ìTake it easy, boss,î I advised. ìThis isnít going to do you any good tomorrow, when you get into that ship. Your chances of coming out alive arenít too good now, so what will they be if you start out worn to pieces with excitement and worry?î
ìYouíre right. Letís not think of it any more. Whereís Shelton?î
ìOver at the Institute arranging for the special photographic plates to be sent us.î
ìHeís been gone a long time, hasnít he?î
ìNot especially; but listen, boss, thereís something wrong with him. I donít like him.î
ìPoppycock! Heís been with me two years, and I have no complaints.î
ìAll right.î I spread my hands in resignation. ìIf you wonít listen to me, you wonít. Just the same I caught him reading one of those infernal pamphlets Otis Eldredge puts out. You know the kind: ëBeware, O mankind, for judgment draws near. Punishment for your sins is at hand. Repent and be saved.í And all the rest of the time-honoured junk.î
Harman snorted in disgust. ìCheap tub-thumping revivalist! I suppose the world will never outgrow his type-not while sufficient morons exist. Still you canít condemn Shelton just because he reads it. Iíve read them myself on occasion.î
ìHe says he picked it up on the sidewalk and read it in ëidle curiosity,í but Iím pretty sure that I saw him take it out of his wallet. Besides, he goes to church every Sunday.î
ìIs that a crime? Everyone does, nowadays!î
ìYes, but not to the Twentieth Century Evangelical Society. Thatís Eldredgeís.î
That jolted Harman. Evidently, it was the first he had heard of it. ìSay, that is something, isnít it? Weíll have to keep an eye on him, then.î
But after that, things started to happen, and we forgot all about Shelton-until it was too late.
There was nothing much left to do that last day before the test, and I wandered into the next room, where I went over Harmanís final report to the Institute. It was my job to correct any errors or mistakes that crept in, but Iím afraid I wasnít very thorough. To tell the truth, I couldnít concentrate. Every few minutes, Iíd fall into a brown study.
It seemed queer, all this fuss over a space travel. When Harman had first announced the approaching perfection of the Prometheus, some six months before, scientific circles had been jubilant. Of course, they were cautious in their statements and qualified everything they said, but there was real enthusiasm.
However, the masses didnít take it that way. It seems strange, perhaps, to you of the twenty-first century, but perhaps we should have expected it in those days of ë73. People werenít very progressive then. For years there had been a swing toward religion, and when the churches came out unanimously against Harmanís rocket-well, there you were.
At first, the opposition confined itself to the churches and we thought it might play itself out. But it didnít The papers got hold of it, and literally spread the gospel. Poor Harman became an anathema to the world in a remarkably short time, and then his troubles began.
He received death threats, and warnings of divine vengeance every day. He couldnít walk the streets in safety. Dozens of sects, to none of which he belonged-he was one of the very rare free-thinkers of the day, which was another count against him-excommunicated him and placed him under special interdict. And, worst of all, Otis Eldredge and his Evangelical Society began stirring up the populace.
Eldredge was a queer character-one of those geniuses, in their way, that arise every so often. Gifted with a golden tongue and a sulphurous vocabulary, he could fairly hypnotize a crowd. Twenty thousand people were so much putty in his hands, could he only bring them within earshot And for four months, he thundered against Harman; for four months, a pouring stream of denunciation rolled forth in oratorical frenzy. And for four months, the temper of the world rose.
But Harman was not to be daunted. In his tiny, five-foot-two body, he had enough spirit for five six-footers. The more the wolves howled, the firmer he held his ground. With almost divine-his enemies said, diabolical-obstinacy, he refused to yield an inch. Yet his outward firmness was to me, who knew him, but an imperfect concealment of the great sorrow and bitter disappointment within.
The ring of the doorbell interrupted my thoughts at that point and brought me to my feet in surprise. Visitors were very few those days.
I looked out the window and saw a tall, portly figure talking with Police Sergeant Cassidy. I recognized him at once as Howard Winstead, head of the Institute. Harman was hurrying out to greet him, and after a short exchange of phrases, the two entered the office. I followed them in, being rather curious as to what could have brought Winstead, who was more politician than scientist, here.
Winstead didnít seem very comfortable, at first; not his usual suave self. He avoided Harmanís eyes in an embarrassed manner and mumbled a few conventionalities concerning the weather. Then he came to the point with direct, undiplomatic bluntness.
ìJohn,î he said, ìhow about postponing the trial for a time?î
ìYou really mean abandoning it altogether, donít you? Well, I wonít, and thatís final.î
Winstead lifted his hand. ìWait now, John, donít get excited. Let me state my case. I know the Institute agreed to give you a free hand, and I know that you paid at least half the expenses out of your own pocket, but-you canít go through with it.î
ìOh, canít I, though?î Herman snorted derisively.
ìNow listen, John, you know your science, but you donít know your human nature, and I do. This is not the world of the ëMad Decades,í whether you realize it or not. There have been profound changes since 1940.î He swung into what was evidently a carefully prepared speech.
ìAfter the First World War, you know, the world as a whole swung away from religion and toward freedom from convention. People were disgusted and disillusioned, cynical and sophisticated. Eldredge calls them ëwicked and sinful.í In spite of that, science flourished-some say it always fares best in such an unconventional period. From its standpoint it was a ëGolden Age.í
ìHowever, you know the political and economic history of the period. It was a time of political chaos and international anarchy; a suicidal, brainless, insane period-and it culminated in the Second World War. And just as the First War led to a period of sophistication, so the Second initiated a return to religion.
ìPeople were disgusted with the ëMad Decades.î They had had enough of it, and feared, beyond all else, a return to it To remove that possibility, they put the ways of those decades behind them. Their motives, you see, were understandable and laudable. All the freedom, all the sophistication, all the lack of convention were gone-swept away clean. We are living now in a second Victorian age; and naturally so, because human history goes by swings of the pendulum and this is the swing toward religion and convention.
ìOne thing only is left over since those days of half a century ago. That one thing is the respect of humanity for science. We have prohibition; smoking for women is outlawed; cosmetics are forbidden; low dresses and short skirts are unheard of; divorce is frowned upon. But science has not been confined-as yet.
ìIt behoves science, then, to be circumspect, to refrain from arousing the people. It will be very easy to make them believe-and Otis Eldredge has come perilously close to doing it in some of his speeches-that it was science that brought about the horrors of the Second World War. Science outstripped culture, they will say, technology outstripped sociology, and it was that unbalance that came so near to destroying the world. Somehow, I am inclined to believe they are not so far wrong, at that.
ìBut do you know what would happen, if it ever did come to that? Scientific research may be forbidden; or, if they donít go that far, it will certainly be so strictly regulated as to stifle in its own decay. It will be a calamity from which humanity would not recover for a millennium.
ìAnd it is your trial flight that may precipitate all this. You are arousing the public to a stage where it will be difficult to calm them. I warn you, John. The consequences will be on your head.î
There was absolute silence for a moment and then Harman forced a smile. ìCome, Howard, youíre letting yourself be frightened by shadows on the wall. Are you trying to tell me that it is your serious belief that the world as a whole is ready to plunge into a second Dark Ages? After all, the intelligent men are on the side of science, arenít they?î
ìIf they are, there arenít many of them left from what I see.î Winstead drew a pipe from his pocket and filled it slowly with tobacco as he continued: ìEldredge formed a League of the Righteous two months ago-they call it the L. R.-and it has grown unbelievably. Twenty million is its membership in the United States alone . Eldredge boasts that after the next election Congress will be his; and there seems to be more truth than bluff in that. Already there has been strenuous lobbying in favour of a bill outlawing rocket experiments, and laws of that type have been enacted in Poland, Portugal and Rumania. Yes, John, we are perilously close to open persecution of science.î He was smoking now in rapid, nervous puffs.
ìBut if I succeed, Howard, if I succeed! What then?î
ìBah! You know the chances for that. Your own estimate gives you only one chance in ten of coming out alive.î
ìWhat does that signify? The next experimenter will learn by my mistakes, and the odds will improve. Thatís the scientific method.î
ìThe mob doesnít know anything about the scientific method; and they donít want to know. Well, what do you say? Will you call it off?î
Harman sprang to his feet, his chair tumbling over with a crash. ìDo you know what you ask? Do you want me to give up my lifeís work, my dream, just like that? Do you think Iím going to sit back and wait for your dear public to become benevolent? Do you think theyíll change in my lifetime?
ìHereís my answer: I have an inalienable right to pursue knowledge. Science has an inalienable right to progress and develop without interference. The world, in interfering with me, is wrong; I am right. And it shall go hard; but I -will not abandon my rights.î
Winstead shook his head sorrowfully. ìYouíre wrong, John, when you speak of ëinalienableí rights. What you call a ërightí is merely a privilege, generally agreed upon . What society accepts, is right; what it does not, is wrong.î
ìWould your friend, Eldredge, agree to such a definition of his ërighteousnessí?î questioned Harman bitterly.
ìNo, he would not, but thatís irrelevant. Take the case of those African tribes who used to be cannibals. They were brought up as cannibals, have the long tradition of cannibalism, and their society accepts the practice. To them , cannibalism is right , and why shouldnít it be? So you see how relative the whole notion is, and how inane your conception of ëinalienableí rights to perform experiments is.î
ìYou know, Howard, you missed your calling when you didnít become a lawyer.î Harman was really growing angry. ìYouíve been bringing out every moth-eaten argument you can think of. For Godís sake, man, are you trying to pretend that it is a crime to refuse to run with the crowd? Do you stand for absolute uniformity, ordinariness, orthodoxy, commonplaceness? Science would die far sooner under the programme you outline than under governmental prohibition.î
Harman stood up and pointed an accusing finger at the other. ìYouíre betraying science and the tradition of those glorious rebels: Galileo, Darwin, Einstein and their kind. My rocket leaves tomorrow on schedule in spite of you and every other stuffed shirt in the United States. Thatís that, and I refuse to listen to you any longer. So you can just get out.î
The head of the Institute, red in the face, turned to me. ìYouíre my witness, young man, that I warned this obstinate nitwit, thisÖ this hare-brained fanatic.î He spluttered a bit, and then strode out, the picture of fiery indignation.
Harman turned to me when he hadî gone: ìWell, what do you think? I suppose you agree with him.î
There was only one possible answer and I made it: ìYouíre not paying me to do anything else but follow orders, boss. Iím sticking with you.î
Just then Shelton came in and Harman packed us both off to go over the calculations of the orbit of flight for the umpteenth time, while he himself went off to bed.
The next day, July 15th, dawned in matchless splendour, and Harman, Shelton, and myself were in an almost gay mood as we crossed the Hudson to where the Prometheus -surrounded by an adequate police guard-lay in gleaming grandeur.
Around it, roped off at an apparently safe distance, rolled a crowd of gigantic proportions. Most of them were hostile, raucously so. In fact, for one fleeting moment, as our motorcycle police escort parted the crowds for us, the shouts and imprecations that reached our ears almost convinced me that we should have listened to Winstead.
But Harman paid no attention to them at all, after one supercilious sneer at a shout of: ìThere goes John Harman, son of Belial.î Calmly, he directed us about our task of inspection. I tested the foot-thick outer walls and the air locks for leaks, then made sure the air purifier worked. Shelton checked up on the repellent screen and the fuel tanks. Finally, Hal-man tried on the clumsy spacesuit, found it suitable, and announced himself ready.
The crowd stirred. Upon a hastily erected platform of wooden planks piled in confusion by some in the mob, there rose up a striking figure. Tall and lean; with thin, ascetic countenance; deep-set, burning eyes, peering and half closed; a thick, white mane crowning all-it was Otis Eldredge. The crowd recognized him at once and many cheered. Enthusiasm waxed and soon the entire turbulent mass of people shouted themselves hoarse over him.
He raised a hand for silence, turned to Harman, who regarded him with surprise and distaste, and pointed a long, bony finger at him:
ìJohn, Harman, son of the devil, spawn of Satan, you are here for an evil purpose. You are about to set out upon a blasphemous attempt to pierce the veil beyond which man is forbidden to go. You are tasting of the forbidden fruit of Eden and beware that you taste not of the fruits of sin.î
The crowd cheered him to the echo and he continued: ìThe finger of God is upon you, John Harman. He shall not allow His works to be defiled. You die today, John Harman.î His voice rose in intensity and his last words were uttered in truly prophetlike fervour.
Harman turned away in disdain. In a loud, clear voice, he addressed the police sergeant: ìIs there any way, officer, of removing these spectators. The trial flight may be attended by some destruction because of the rocket blasts, and theyíre crowding too close.î
The policeman answered in a crisp, unfriendly tone: ìIf youíre afraid of being mobbed, say so, Mr. Harman. You donít have to worry, though, weíll hold them back. And as for danger-from that contraption-î He sniffed loudly in the direction of the Prometheus , evoking a torrent of jeers and yells.
Harman said nothing further, but climbed into the ship in silence. And when he did so, a queer sort of stillness fell over the mob; a palpable tension. There was no attempt at rushing the ship, an attempt I had thought inevitable. On the contrary, Otis Eldredge himself shouted to everyone to move back.
ìLeave the sinner to his sins,î he shouted. ì ëVengeance is mine,í saith the Lord.î
As the moment approached, Shelton nudged me. ìLetís get out of here,î he whispered in a strained voice. ìThose rocket blasts are poison.î Saying this, he broke into a run, beckoning anxiously for me to follow.
We had not yet reached the fringes of the crowd when there was a terrific roar behind me. A wave of heated air swept over me. There was the frightening hiss of some speeding object past my ear, and I was thrown violently to the ground. For a few moments I lay dazed, my ears ringing and my head reeling.
When I staggered drunkenly to my feet again, it was to view a dreadful sight. Evidently, the entire fuel supply of the Prometheus had exploded at once, and where it had lain a moment ago there was now only a yawning hole. The ground was strewn with wreckage. The cries of the hurt were heartrending, and the mangled bodies-but I wonít try to describe those.
A weak groan at my feet attracted my attention. One look, and I gasped in horror, for it was Shelton, the back of his head a bloody mass.
ìI did it.î His voice was hoarse and triumphant but withal so low that I could scarcely hear it. ìI did it. I broke open the liquid-oxygen compartments and when the spark went through the acetylide mixture the whole cursed thing exploded.î He gasped a bit and tried to move but failed. ìA piece of wreckage must have hit me, but I donít care. Iíll die knowing that-î
His voice was nothing more than a rasping rattle, and on his face was the ecstatic look of martyr. He died then, and I could not find it in my heart to condemn him.
It was then I first thought of Harman. Ambulances from Manhattan and from Jersey City were on the scene, and one had sped to a wooden patch some five hundred yards distant, where, caught in the treetops, lay a splintered fragment of the Prometheusí forward compartment. I limped there as fast as I could, but they had dragged out Harman and clanged away long before I could reach them.
After that, I didnít stay. The disorganized crowd had no thought but for the dead and wounded now , but when they recovered, and bent their thoughts to revenge, my life would not be worth a straw. I followed the dictates of the better part of valour and quietly disappeared.
The next week was a hectic one for me. During that time, I lay in hiding at the home of a friend, for it would have been more than my life was worth to allow myself to be seen and recognized. Harman, himself, lay in a Jersey City hospital, with nothing more than superficial cuts and bruises-thanks to the backward force of the explosion and the saving clump of trees which cushioned the fall of the Prometheus . It was on him that the brunt of the worldís wrath fell.
New York, and the rest of the world also, just about went crazy. Every last paper in the city came out with gigantic headlines, ì28 Killed, 73 Wounded-the Price of Sin,î printed in blood-red letters. The editorials howled for Harmanís life, demanding he be arrested and tried for first-degree murder.
The dreaded cry of ìLynch him!î was raised throughout the five boroughs, and milling thousands crossed the river and converged on Jersey City. At their head was Otis Eldredge, both legs in splints, addressing the crowd from an open automobile as they marched. It was a veritable army.
Mayor Carson of Jersey City called out every available policeman and phoned frantically to Trenton for the State militia. New York clamped down on every bridge and tunnel leaving the city-but not till after many thousands had left.
There were pitched battles on the Jersey coast that sixteenth of July. The vastly outnumbered police clubbed indiscriminately but were gradually pushed back and back. Mounties rode down upon the mob relentlessly but were swallowed up and pulled down by sheer force of numbers. Not until tear gas was used, did the crowd halt-and even then they did not retreat.
The next day, martial law was declared, and the State militia entered Jersey City. That was the end for the lynchers. Eldredge was called to confer with the mayor, and after the conferences ordered his followers to disperse.
In a statement to the newspapers. Mayor Carson said: ìJohn Harman must needs suffer for his crime, but it is essential that he do so legally. Justice must take its course, and the State of New Jersey will take all necessary measures.î
By the end of the week, normality of a sort had returned and Harman slipped out of the public spotlight. Two more weeks and there was scarcely a word about him in the newspapers, excepting such casual references to him in the discussion of the new Zittman antirocketry bill that had just passed both houses of Congress by unanimous votes.
Yet he remained in the hospital still. No legal action had been taken against him, but it began to appear that a sort of indefinite imprisonment ìfor his own protectionî might be his eventual fate. Therefore, I bestirred myself to action.
Temple Hospital is situated in a lonely and outlying district of Jersey City, and on a dark, moonless night I experienced no difficulty at all in invading the grounds unobserved. With a facility that surprised me, I sneaked in through a basement window, slugged a sleepy interne into insensibility and proceeded to Room 15E, which was listed in the books as Harmanís.
ìWhoís there?î Harmanís surprised shout was music in my ears.
ìSh! Quiet! Itís I, Cliff McKenny.î
ìYou! What are you doing here?î
ìTrying to get you out. If I donít, youíre liable to stay here the rest of your life. Come on, letís go.î
I was hustling him into his clothes while we were speaking, and in no time at all we were sneaking down the corridor. We were out safely and into my waiting car before Harman collected his scattered wits sufficiently to begin asking questions.
ìWhatís happened since that day?î was the first question. ìI donít remember a thing after starting the rocket blasts until I woke up in the hospital.î
ìDidnít they tell you anything?î
ìNot a damn thing,î he swore. ìI asked until I was hoarse.î
So I told him the whole story from the explosion on. His eyes were wide with shocked surprise when I told of the dead and wounded, and filled with wild rage when he heard of Sheltonís treachery. The story of the riots and attempted lynching evoked a muffled curse from between set lips.
ìOf course, the papers howled ëmurder,í ì I concluded, ìbut they couldnít pin that on you. They tried manslaughter, but there were too many eye-witnesses that had heard your request for the removal of the crowd and the police sergeantís absolute refusal to do so. That, of course, absolved you from all blame. The police sergeant himself died in the explosion, and they couldnít make him the goat.
ìStill, with Eldredge yelling for your hide, youíre never safe. It would be best to leave while able.î
Harman nodded his head in agreement ìEldredge survived the explosion, did he?î
ìYes, worse luck. He broke both legs, but it takes more than that to shut his mouth.î
Another week had passed before I reached our future haven-my uncleís farm in Minnesota. There, in a lonely and out-of-the-way rural community, we stayed while the hullabaloo over Harmanís disappearance gradually died down and the perfunctory search for us faded away. The search, by the way, was short indeed, for the authorities seemed more relieved than concerned over the disappearance.
Peace and quiet did wonders with Harman. In six months he seemed a new man-quite ready to consider a second attempt at space travel. Not all the misfortunes in the world could stop him, it seemed, once he had his heart set on something.
ìMy mistake the first time,î he told me one winterís day, ìlay in announcing the experiment. I should have taken the temper of the people into account, as Winstead said. This time, howeverî-he rubbed his hands and gazed thoughtfully into the distance-îIíll steal a march on them. The experiment will he performed in secrecy-absolute secrecy.î
I laughed grimly, ìIt would have to be. Do you know that all future experiment in rocketry, even entirely theoretical research is a crime punishable by death?î
ìAre you afraid, then?î
ìOf course not, boss. Iím merely stating a fact. And hereís another plain fact. We two canít build a ship all by ourselves, you know.î
ìIíve thought of that and figured a way out, Cliff. Whatís more, I can take care of the money angle, too. Youíll have to do some traveling, though.
ìFirst, youíll have to go to Chicago and look up the firm of Roberts amp; Scranton and withdraw everything thatís left of my fatherís inheritance, which,î he added in a rueful aside, ìis more than half gone on the first ship. Then, locate as many of the old crowd as you can: Harry Jenkins, Joe OíBrien, Neil Stanton-all of them. And get back as quickly as you can. I am tired of delay.î
Two days later, I left for Chicago. Obtaining my uncleís consent to the entire business was a simple affair. ìMight as well be strung up for a herd of sheep as for a lamb,î he grunted, ìso go ahead. Iím in enough of a mess now and can afford a bit more, I guess.î
It took quite a bit of travelling and even more smooth talk and persuasion before I managed to get four men to come: the three mentioned by Harman and one other, a Saul Simonoff. With that skeleton force and with the half millioní still left Harman out of the reputed millions left him by his father, we began work.
The building of the New Prometheus is a story in itself-a long story of five years of discouragement and insecurity. Little by little, buying girders in Chicago, beryl-steel plates in New York, a vanadium cell in San Francisco, miscellaneous items in scattered comers of the nation, we constructed the sister ship to the ill-fated Prometheus .
The difficulties in the way were all but insuperable. To prevent drawing suspicion down upon us, we had to spread our purchases over periods of time, and to see to it, as well, that the orders were made out to various places. For this we required the co-operation of various friends, who, to be sure, did not know at the time for exactly what purpose the purchases were being used.
We had to synthesize our own fuel, ten tons of it, and that was perhaps the hardest job of all; certainly it took the most time. And finally, as Harmanís money dwindled, we came up against our biggest problem-the necessity of economizing. From the beginning we had known that we could never make the New Prometheus as large or as elaborate as the first ship had been, but it soon developed that we would have to reduce its equipment to a point perilously close to the danger line. The repulsion screen was barely satisfactory and all attempts at radio communication were perforce abandoned.
And as we labored through the years, there in the backwoods of northern Minnesota, the world moved on, and Winsteadís prophecies proved to have hit amazingly near the mark.
The events of those five years-from 1973 to 1978-are well known to the schoolboys of today, the period being the climax of what we now call the ìNeo-Victorian Age.î The happenings of those years seem well-nigh unbelievable as we look back upon them now.
The outlawing of all research on space travel came in the very beginning, but was a bare start compared to the antiscientific measures taken in the ensuing years. The next congressional elections, those of 1974, resulted in a Congress in which Eldredge controlled the House and held the balance of power in the Senate.
Hence, no time was lost. At the first session of the ninety-third Congress, the famous Stonely-Carter bill was passed. It established the Federal Scientific Research Investigatory Bureau-the FSRIB-which was given full power to pass on the legality of all research in the country. Every laboratory, industrial or scholastic, was required to file information, in advance, on all projected research before this new bureau, which could, and did, ban absolutely all such as it disapproved of.
The inevitable appeal to the supreme court came on November 9, 1974, in the case of Westly vs. Simmons, in which Joseph Westly of Stanford upheld his right to continue his investigations on atomic power on the grounds that the StonelyCarter act was unconstitutional.
How we five, isolated amid the snowdrifts of the Middle West, followed that case! We had all the Minneapolis and St. Paul papers sent to us-always reaching us two days late- and devoured every word of print concerning it. For the two months of suspense work ceased entirely on the New Prometheus .
It was rumoured at first that the court would declare the act unconstitutional, and monster parades were held in every large town against this eventuality. The League of the Righteous brought its powerful influence to bear-and even the supreme court submitted. It was five to four for constitutionality. Science strangled by the vote of one man.
And it was strangled beyond a doubt. The members of the bureau were Eldredge men, heart and soul, and nothing that would not have immediate industrial use was passed.
ìScience has gone too far,î said Eldredge in a famous speech at about that time. ìWe must halt it indefinitely, and allow the world to catch up. Only through that and trust in God may we hope to achieve universal and permanent prosperity.î
But this was one of Eldridgeís last statements. He had never fully recovered from the broken legs he received that fateful day in July of ë73, and his strenuous life since then had strained his constitution past the breaking point. On February 2, 1976, he passed away amid a burst of mourning unequalled since Lincolnís assassination.
His death had no immediate effect on the course of events. The rules of the FSRIB grew, in fact, in stringency as the years passed. So starved and choked did science become, that once more colleges found themselves forced to reinstate philosophy and the classics as the chief studies-and at that the student body fell to the lowest point since the beginning of the twentieth century.
These conditions prevailed more or less throughout the civilized world, reaching even lower depths in England, and perhaps least depressing in Germany, which was the last to fall under the ìNeo-Victorianî influence.
The nadir of science came in the spring of 1978, a bare month before the completion of the New Prometheus, with the passing of the ìEaster Edictî-it was issued the day before Easter. By it, all independent research or experimentation was absolutely forbidden. The FSRIB thereafter reserved the right to allow only such research as it specifically requested .
John Harman and I stood before the gleaming metal of the New Prometheus that Easter Sunday; I in the deepest gloom, and he in an almost jovial mood.
ìWell, Clifford, my boy,î said he, ìthe last ton of fuel, a few polishing touches, and I am ready for my second attempt. This time there will be no Sheltons among us.î He hummed a hymn. That was all the radio played those days, and even we rebels sang them from sheer frequency of repetition.
I grunted sourly: ìItís no use, boss. Ten to one, you end up somewhere in space, and even if you come back, youíll most likely be hung by the neck. We canít win.î My head shook dolefully from side to side.
ìBah! This state of affairs canít last, Cliff.î
ìI think it will. Winstead was right that time. The pendulum swings, and since 1945 itís been swinging against us. Weíre ahead of the times-or behind them.î
ìDonít speak of that fool, Winstead. Youíre making the same mistake he did. Trends are things of centuries and millenniums, not years or decades. For five hundred years we have been moving toward science. You canít reverse that in thirty years.î
ìThen what are we doing?î I asked sarcastically.
ìWeíre going through a momentary reaction following a period of too-rapid advance in the Mad Decades. Just such a reaction took place in the Romantic Age-the first Victorian Period-following the too-rapid advance of the eighteenth century Age of Reason.î
ìDo you really think so?î I was shaken by his evident self-assurance.
ìOf course. This period has a perfect analogy in the spasmodic ërevivalsí that used to hit the small towns in Americaís Bible Belt a century or so ago. For a week, perhaps everyone would get religion, and virtue would reign triumphant. Then, one by one, they would backslide and the Devil would resume his sway.
ìIn fact, there are symptoms of backsliding even now. The L. R. has indulged in one squabble after another since Eldredgeís death. There have been half a dozen schisms already. The very extremities to which those in power are going are helping us, for the country is rapidly tiring of it.î
And that ended the argument-I in total defeat, as usual.
A month later, the New Prometheus was complete. It was nowhere near as glittering and as beautiful as the original, and bore many a trace of makeshift workmanship, but we were proud of it-proud and triumphant.
ìIím going to try again, menî-Harmanís voice was husky, and his little frame vibrant with happiness-îand I may not make it, but for that I donít care.î His eyes shone in anticipation. ìIíll be shooting through the void at last, and the dream of mankind will come true. Out around the Moon and back; the first to see the other side. Itís worth the chance,î
ìYou wonít have fuel enough to land on the Moon, boss, which is a pity,î I said.
At that a pessimistic whisper ran through the little group surrounding him, to which he paid no attention.
ìGood-bye,î he said. ìIíll be seeing you.î And with a cheerful grin he climbed into the ship.
Fifteen minutes later, the five of us sat about the living room table, frowning, lost in thought, eyes gazing out of the building at the spot where a burned section of soil marked the spot where a few minutes earlier the New Prometheus had lain.
Simonoff voiced the thought that was in the mind of each one of us: ìMaybe it would be better for him not to come back. He wonít be treated very well if he does, I think.î And we all nodded in gloomy assent.
How foolish that prediction seems to me now from the hindsight of three decades.
The rest of the story is really not mine, for I did not see Harman again until a month after his eventful trip ended in a safe landing.
It was almost thirty-six hours after the take-off that a screaming projectile shot its way over Washington and buried itself in the mud just across the Potomac.
Investigators were at the scene of the landing within fifteen minutes, and in another fifteen minutes the police were there, for it was found that the projectile was a rocketship . They stared in involuntary awe at the tired, dishevelled man who staggered out in near-collapse.
There was utter silence while he shook his fist at the staring spectators and shouted: ìGo ahead, hang me, fools. But Iíve reached the Moon, and you canít hang that . Get the FSRIB. Maybe theyíll declare the flight illegal and, therefore, nonexistent.î He laughed weakly and suddenly collapsed.
Someone shouted: ìTake him to a hospital. Heís sick.î In stiff unconsciousness Harman was bundled into a police car and carried away, while the police formed a guard about the rocketship.
Government officials arrived and investigated the ship, read the log, inspected the drawings and photographs he had taken of the Moon, and finally departed in silence. The crowd grew and the word spread that a man had reached the Moon.
Curiously enough, there was little resentment of the fact. Men were impressed and awed; the crowd whispered and cast inquisitive glances at the dim crescent of Luna, scarcely seen in the bright sunlight. Over all, an uneasy pall of silence, the silence of indecision, lay.
Then, at the hospital, Harman revealed his identity, and the fickle world went wild. Even Harman himself was stunned in surprise at the rapid change in the worldís temper. It seemed almost incredible, and yet it was true. Secret discontent, combined with a heroic tale of man against overwhelming odds- the sort of tale that had stirred manís soul since the beginning of time-served to sweep everyone into an ever-swelling current of anti-Victorianism. And Eldredge was dead-no other could replace him.
I saw Harman at the hospital shortly after that. He was propped up and still half buried with papers, telegrams and letters. He grinned at me and nodded. ìWell, Cliff,î he whispered, ìthe pendulum swung back again.î



***



Actually, though ìTrendsî was the second story I sold, it was the third to be published. Ahead of it was not only ìMarooned off Vesta,î but another story (to be mentioned shortly) that was written and sold after ìTrendsî but was rushed into print sooner. Both earlier stories were, however, published in Amazing and, somehow, I find it difficult to count them. To me, the first story I sold to Campbell and published in Astounding is my first significant published story. This is rather ungrateful of me toward Amazing , but I canít help it.
The July 1939 issue of Astounding is sometimes considered by later fans to mark the beginning of science fictionís so-called Golden Age, a period stretching through most of the 1940s. In that period, Campbeflís views were in full force in the magazine, and the authors he trained and developed were writing with the full ardor of youth. I wish I could say that ìTrendsî was what marked the beginning of that Golden Age, but I canít. Its appearance in that issue was pure coincidence.
What really counted was that the lead novelette in the July 1939 issue was ìBlack Destroyer,î by A. E. van Vogt, a first story by a new author, while in the next issue, August 1939, was a short story, ìLifeline,î by Robert A. Heinlein, another first story by a new author.
In time to come, Van Vogt, Heinlein, and I would be universally listed among the top authors of the Golden Age, but Van Vogt and Heinlein were that from the very beginning. Each blazed forth as a first-magazine star at the moment his first story appeared, and their status never flagged throughout the remainder of the Golden Age. I, on the other hand (and this is not false modesty), came up only gradually. I was very little noticed for a while and came to be considered a major author by such gradual steps that despite the healthy helping of vanity with which I am blessed, I myself was the last to notice.
ìTrendsî is an amusing story in some respects. It sets the initial space flights to the Moon in the 1970s. I thought at the time I was being daring indeed, but it has turned out that I was behind the eventual reality by a full decade, since what I described was done, and with immensely greater sophistication, in the 1960s. My description of the first attempts at space flight was, of course, incredibly naive, in hindsight.
In one respect, however, the story is unusual. In recent years Phil Klas (a science fiction writer who publishes under the pseudonym ìWilliam Tennî) pointed out to me that this was the first story in history that predicted resistance of any kind to the notion of space exploration. In all other stories, the general public was either indifferent or enthusiastic. This makes me sound enormously and uniquely perceptive, but having explained the nature of the book I was doing my NYA work on, I canít take credit for brilliance. (Heck!)
Notice also the reference to the ìSecond [World War] of 1940.î The story, remember, was written two months after Munich. I did not believe at the time that this meant ìpeace in our time,î as Neville Chamberlain had maintained. I estimated that there would be war in a year and a half, and again! was too conservative.
ìTrends,î incidentally, is one of the few stories I have written in the first person, and the narrator is named Clifford McKenny. (Why my penchant for Irish last names in those days I havenít been able to figure out.) Behind the first name, though, lies a story.
After my May 1938 scare concerning the demise of Astounding , I began sending monthly letters to the magazine, carefully rating the stories. (I stopped after I began selling stories myself.) These were all published, and, in fact, I had sent a letter to Astounding , which was published, back in 1935. Two established science fiction writers wrote me personally in response to remarks I made concerning their stories. These were Russell R. Winterbotham and Clifford D. Simak.
With both, I maintained a correspondence, quite regular at first, and with long dry intervals in later years. The friendship that resulted, though long distance, was enduring. I met Russ Winterbotham in person only once, and that was at the World Science Fiction Convention in Cleveland in 1966. He died in 1971. I have met Cliff Simak three times, the most recent occasion being at the World Science Fiction Convention in Boston in 1971, where he was guest of honor.
Simakís first letter to me was in response to a letter of mine printed in Astounding that had given a low rating to his story ìRule 18,î in the July 1938 issue. Simak wrote to ask details so that he might consider my criticisms and perhaps profit from them. (Would that I would react so gently and rationally to adverse criticism!)
I reread the story in order to be able to answer properly and found, to my surprise, that there was nothing wrong with it at all. What he had done was to write the story in separate scenes with no explicit transition passages between. I wasnít used to that technique, so the story seemed choppy and incoherent. The second time around, I recognized what he was doing and realized that not only was the story not in the least incoherent but it moved with a slick speed that would have been impossible if all the dull, breadand-butter transitions had been inserted.
I wrote Simak to explain, and adopted the same device in my own stories. Whatís more, I attempted, as far as possible, to make use of something similar to Simakís cool and unadorned style,
I have sometimes heard science fiction writers speak of the influence upon their style of such high-prestige literary figures as Kafka, Proust, and Joyce. This may be pose or it may be reality, but, for myself, I make no such claim. I learned how to write science fiction by the attentive reading of science fiction, and among the major influences on my style was Clifford Simak.
Simak was particularly encouraging in those anxious months during which I was trying to sell a story. On the day I made my first sale, I had a letter, all sealed and addressed and stamped, waiting to be mailed to him. I tore it open to add the news, and destroying a stamped envelope, which represented a clear loss of several cents, was not something I did lightly in those days.
It has always pleased me, therefore, that my first sale to Campbell had, as its first-person narrator, a character named in Clifford Simakís honor.
One more point about ìTrendsî-
In my early sessions with Campbell, he had occasionally pointed out the value of having a name that wasnít odd and hard to pronounce, and suggested the use of a common Anglo-Saxon name as a pseudonym. On this point, I clearly expressed intransigence. My name was my name and it would go on my stories.
When ìTrendsî was sold, I steeled myself for what I thought might be a struggle with Campbell that might even cost me my precious sale. -It never happened. Perhaps it was because my name had already appeared on two stories in Amazing , or perhaps Campbell recognized I would not agree to a pseudonym, but he never raised the point.
As it happened, my disinclination for a pseudonym was lucky indeed, for the name Isaac Asimov proved highly visible. No one could see the name for the first time without smiling at its oddness; and anyone seeing it the second time would instantly remember the first time. Iím convinced that at least part of my eventual popularity came about because the readers recognized the name quickly and became aware of my stories as a group.
Indeed, matters came full circle. In later years, I frequently met readers who were convinced the name was a pseudonym designed to achieve visibility and that my real name must be something like John Smith. It was sometimes hard to disabuse them.
While I was revising ìTrendsî for Campbell, I was also working on another story, ìThe Weapon Too Dreadful to Use.î That one I did not submit to Campbell. Either I did not wish to push him too hard immediately after I had made a sale to him, or I suspected the story wasnít good enough for him and didnít want to spoil the impression ìTrendsî might have made. In either case (and I donít really remember the motive) I decided to try it on Amazing first. It was also a one cent market, after all, and perhaps I thought I owed them another chance, now that I had made my Campbell sale.
I mailed ìThe Weapon Too Dreadful to Useî to Amazing on February 6, 1939, and on February 20 received notice of acceptance. Amazing may have bought it because it needed a story in a hurry, for it appeared in the May issue, which reached the newsstands only three weeks after the sale. That made it my second published story, for it appeared two months before ìTrends.î








The Weapon Too Dreadful to Use


Karl Frantor found the prospect a terribly dismal one. From low-hanging clouds, fell eternal misty rain; squat, rubbery vegetation with its dull, reddish-brown colour stretched away in all directions. Now and then a Hop-scotch Bird fluttered wildly above them, emitting plaintive squawks as it went.
Karl turned his head to gaze at the tiny dome of Aphrodopolis , largest city on Venus.
ìGod,î he muttered, ìeven the dome is better than this awful world out here.î He pulled the rubberized fabric of his coat closer about him. ìIíll be glad to get back to Earth again.î
He turned to the slight figure of Antil, the Venusian, ìWhen are we coming to the ruins, Antil?î
There was no answer and Karl noticed the tear that rolled down the Venusianís green, puckered cheeks. Another glistened in the large, lemur-like eyes; soft, incredibly beautiful eyes.
The Earthmanís voice softened. ìSorry, Antil, I didnít mean to say anything against Venus.î
Antil turned his green face toward Karl, ìIt was not that, my friend. Naturally, you would not find much to admire in an alien world. I, however, love Venus, and I weep because I am overcome with its beauty.î The words came fluently but with the inevitable distortion caused by vocal cords unfitted for harsh-languages.
ìI know its seems incomprehensible to you,î Antil continued, ìbut to me Venus is a paradise, a golden land-I cannot express my feelings for it properly.î
ìYet there are some that say only Earthmen can love.î Karlís sympathy was strong and sincere.
The Venusian shook his head sadly. ìThere is much besides the capacity to feel emotion that your people deny us.î
Karl changed the subject hurriedly. ëTell me, Antil, doesnít Venus present a dull aspect even to you? Youíve been to Earth and should know. How can this eternity of brown and grey compare t© the living, warm colours of Earth?î
ìIt is far more beautiful to me. You forget that my colour sense is so enormously different from yours. [The Venusian eye can distinguish between two tints, the wavelengths of which differ by as little as five Angstrom units. They see thousands of colours to which Earthmen are blind.-Author.] How can I explain the beauties, the wealth of colour in which this landscape abounds?î He fell silent, lost in the wonders he spoke of, while to the Terrestrial the deadly, melancholy grey remained unchanged.
ìSomeday,î Antilís voice came as from a person in a dream, ìVenus will once more belong to the Venusians. The Earthlings shall no longer rule us, and the glory of our ancestors shall return to us.î
Karl laughed. ìCome, now, Antil, you speak like a member of the Green Bands, that are giving the government so much trouble. I thought you didnít believe in violence.î
ìI donít, Karl,î Antilís eyes were grave and rather frightened, ìbut the extremists are gaining power, and I fear the worst. And if-if open rebellion against Earth breaks out, I must join them.î
ìBut you disagree with them.î
ìYes, of course,î he shrugged his shoulders, a gesture he had learned from Earthmen, ìwe can gain nothing by violence. There are five billion of you and scarcely a hundred million of us. You have resources and weapons while we have none. It would be a foolís venture, and even should we win, we might leave such a heritage of hatred that there could never be peace among our two planets.î
ìThen why join them?î
ìBecause I am a Venusian.î
The Earthman burst into laughter again. ìPatriotism, it seems, is as irrational On Venus as on Earth. But come, let us proceed to the ruins of your ancient city. Are we nearly there?î
ìYes,î answered Antil, ìitís a matter of little more than an Earth mile now. Remember, however, that you are to disturb nothing. The ruins of Ash-taz.-zor are sacred to us, as the sole existing remnant of the time when we, too, were a great race, rather than the degenerate remains of one.î
They walked on in silence, slogging through the soft earth beneath, dodging the writhing roots of the Snaketree, and giving the occasional Tumbling Vines they passed a wide berth.
It was Antil who resumed the conversation.
ìPoor Venus.î His quiet, wistful voice was sad. ìFifty years ago the Earthman came with promises of peace and plenty-and we believed. We showed them the emerald mines and the juju weed and their eyes glittered with desire. More and more came, and their arrogance grew. And now-î
ìItís too bad, Antil,î Karl said, ìbut you really feel too strongly about it.î
ìToo strongly! Are we allowed to vote? Have we any representation at all in the Venusian Provincial Congress? Arenít there laws against Venusians riding in the same stratocars as Earthlings, or eating in the same hotel, or living in the same house? Are not all colleges closed to us? Arenít the best and most fertile parts of the planet pre-empted by Earthlings? Are there any rights at all that Terrestrials allow us upon our own planet?î
ìWhat you say is perfectly true, and I deplore it. But similar conditions once existed on Earth with regard to certain so-called ëinferior races,í and in time, all those disabilities were removed until today total equality reigns. Remember, too, that the intelligent people of Earth are on your side. Have I, for instance, ever displayed any prejudice against a Venusian?î
ìNo, Karl, you know you havenít. But how many intelligent men are there? On Earth, it took long and weary millennia, filled with war and suffering, before equality was established. What if Venus refuses to wait those millennia?î
Karl frowned, ìYouíre right, of course, but you must wait What else can you do?î
ìI donít know-I donít know,î Antilís voice trailed into silence.
Suddenly, Karl wished he hadnít started on this trip to the ruins of mysterious Ash-taz-zor . The maddeningly monotonous terrain, the just grievances of Antil had served to depress him greatly. He was about to call the whole thing on when the Venusian raised his webbed fingers to point out a mound of earth ahead.
ìThatís the entrance,î he said; ì Ash-taz-zor has been buried under the soil for uncounted thousands of years, and only Venusians know of it. Youíre the first Earthman ever to see it.î
ìI shall keep it absolutely secret, Antil. I have promised.î
ìCome, then.î
Antil brushed aside the lush vegetation to reveal a narrow entrance between two boulders and beckoned to Karl to follow. Into a narrow, damp corridor they crept. Antil drew from his pouch a small Atomite lamp, which cast its pearly white glow upon walls of dripping stone.
îThese corridors and burrows,î he said, ìwere dug three centuries ago by our ancestors who considered the city a holy place. Of late, however, we have neglected it. I was the first to visit it in a long, long time. Perhaps that is another sign of our degeneracy.î
For over a hundred yards they walked on straight ahead; then the corridors flared out into a lofty dome. Karl gasped at the view before him. There were the remains of buildings, architectural marvels unrivalled on Earth since the days of Periclean Athens. But all lay in shattered ruins, so that only a hint of the cityís magnificence remained.
Antil led the way across the open space and plunged into another burrow that twisted its way for half a mile through soil and rock. Here and there, side-corridors branched off, and once or twice Karl caught glimpses of ruined structures. He would have investigated had not Antil kept him on the path.
Again they emerged, this time before a low, sprawling building constructed of a smooth, green stone. Its right wing was utterly smashed, but the rest seemed scarcely touched.
The Venusianís eyes shone; his slight form straightened with pride. ìThis is what corresponds to a modern museum of arts and sciences. In this you shall see the past greatness and culture of Venus.î
With high excitement, Karl entered-the first Earthman ever to see these ancient achievements. The interior, he found, was divided into a series of deep alcoves, branching out from the long central colonnade. The ceiling was one great painting that showed dimly in the light of the Atomite lamp.
Lost in wonder, the Earthman wandered through the alcoves. There was an extraordinary sense of strangeness to the sculptures and paintings about him, an unearthliness that doubled their beauty.
Karl realized that he missed something vital in Venusian art simply because of the lack of common ground between his own culture and theirs, but he could appreciate the technical excellence of the work. Especially, did he admire the colour-work of the paintings which went far beyond anything he had ever seen on Earth. Cracked, faded, and scaling though they were, there was a blending and a harmony about them that was superb.
ìWhat wouldnít Michelangelo have given,î he said to Antil, ìto have the marvellous colour perception of the Venusian eye.î
Antil inflated his chest with happiness. ìEvery race has its own attributes. I have often wished my ears could distinguish the slight tones and pitches of sound the way it is said Earthmen can. Perhaps I would then be able to understand what it is that is so pleasing about your Terrestrial music. As it is, its noise is dreadfully monotonous to me.î
They passed on, and every minute Karlís opinion of Venusian culture mounted higher. There were long, narrow strips of thin metal, bound together, covered with the lines and ovals of Venusian script-thousands upon thousands of them. In them, Karl knew, might lie such secrets as the scientists of Earth would give half their lives to know.
Then, when Antil pointed out a tiny, six-inch-high affair, and said that, according to the inscription, it was some type of atomic converter with an efficiency several times any of the current Terrestrial models, Karl exploded.
ìWhy donít you reveal these secrets to Earth? If they only knew your accomplishments in ages past, Venusians would occupy a far higher place than they do now.î
ìThey would make use of our knowledge of former days, yes,î Antil replied bitterly, ìbut they would never release their stranglehold on Venus and its people. I hope you are not forgetting your promise of absolute secrecy.î
ìNo, Iíll keep quiet, but I think youíre making a mistake.î
ìI think not,î Antil turned to leave the alcove, but Karl called to him to wait.
ìArenít we going into this little room here?î he asked.
Antil whirled, eyes staring, ìRoom? What room are you talking about? Thereís no room here.î
Karlís eyebrows shot up in surprise as he mutely pointed out the narrow crack that extended half way up the rear wall.
The Venusian muttered something beneath his breath and fell to his knees, delicate fingers probing the crack.
ìHelp me, Karl. This door was never meant to be opened, I think. At least there is no record of its being here, and I know the ruins of Ash-taz-zor perhaps better than any other of my people.î
The two pushed against the section of the wall, which gave backward with groaning reluctance for a short distance, then yielded suddenly so as to catapult them into the tiny, almost empty cubicle beyond. They regained their feet and stared about.
The Earthman pointed out broken, ragged rust-streaks on the floor, and along the line where door joined wall. ìYour people seem to have sealed this room up pretty effectively. Only the rust of eons broke the bonds. Youíd think they had some sort of secret stored here.î
Antil shook his green head. ìThere was no evidence of a door last time I was here. However-î he raised the Atomite lamp up high and surveyed the room rapidly, ìthere doesnít seem to be anything here, anyway.î
He was right. Aside from a nondescript oblong chest that squatted on six stubby legs, the place contained only unbelievable quantities of dust and the musty, almost suffocating smell of long-shut-up tombs.
Karl approached the chest, tried to move it from the corner where it stood. It didnít budge, but the cover slipped under his pressing fingers.
ìThe coverís removable, Antil. Look!î He pointed to a shallow compartment within, which contained a square slab of some glassy substance and five six-inch-long cylinders resembling fountain-pens.
Antil shrieked with delight when he saw these objects and for the first time since Karl knew him, lapsed into sibilant Venusian gibberish. He removed the glassy slab and inspected it closely. Karl, his curiosity aroused, did likewise. It was covered with closely-spaced, varicoloured dots, but there seemed no reason for Antilís extreme glee.
ìWhat is it, Antil?î
ìIt is a complete document in our ancient ceremonial language. Up to now we have never had more than disjointed fragments. This is a great find.î
ìCan you decipher it?î Karl regarded the object with more respect.
ìI think I can. It is a dead language and I know little more than a smattering. You see, it is a colour language. Each word is designated by a combination of two, and sometimes three, coloured dots. The colours are finely differentiated, though, and a Terrestrial, even if he had the key to the language, would have to use a spectroscope to read it.î
ìCan you work on it now?î
ìI think so, Karl. The Atomite lamp approximates normal daylight very closely, and I ought to have no trouble with it. However, it may take me quite a time; so perhaps youíd better continue your investigation. Thereís no danger of your getting lost, provided you remain inside this building.î
Karl left, taking a second Atomite lamp with him, left Antil, the Venusian, bent over the ancient manuscript, deciphering it slowly and painfully.
Two hours passed before the Earthman returned; but when he did, Anti! had scarcely changed his position. Yet, now, there was a look of horror on the Venusianís face that had not been there before. The ìcolourî message lay at his feet, disregarded. The noisy entrance of the Earthman made no impressioní upon him. As if ossified, he sat in unmoving, staring fright.
Karl jumped to his side. ìAntil, Antil, whatís wrong?î
Antilís head turned slowly, as though moving through viscous liquid, and his eyes gazed unseeingly at his friend. Karl grasped the otherís thin shoulders and shook him unmercifuily.
The Venusian came to his senses. Writhing out of Karlís grasp he sprang to his feet. From the desk in the corner he removed the five cylindrical objects, handling them with a queer sort of reluctance, placing them in his pouch. There, likewise, did he put the slab he had deciphered.
Having done this, he replaced the cover on the chest and motioned Karl out of the room. ìWe must go now. Already we have stayed too long.î His voice had an odd, frightened tone about it that made the Earthman uncomfortable.
Silently, they retraced their steps until once more they stoodí upon the soaked surface of Venus. It was still day, but twilight was near. Karl felt a growing hunger. They would need to hurry if they expected to reach Aphrodopolis before the coming of night. Karl turned up the collar of his slicker, pulled his rubberized cap low over his forehead and set out,
Mile after mile passed by and the domed city once more rose upon the grey horizon. The Earthman chewed at damp ham sandwiches, wished fervently for the comfortable dryness of Aphrodopolis . Through it all, the normally friendly Venusian maintained a stony silence, vouchsafing not so much as a glance upon his companion.
Karl accepted this philosophically. He had a far higher regard for Venusians than the great majority of Earthmen, but even he experienced a faint disdain for the ultra-emotional character of Antil and his kind. This brooding silence was but a manifestation of feelings that in Karl would perhaps have resulted in no more than a sigh or a frown. Realizing this, Antilís mood scarcely affected him.
Yet the memory of the haunting fright in Antilís eyes aroused a faint unease. It had come after the translation of that queer slab. What secret could have been revealed in that message by those scientific progenitors of the Venusians?
It was with some diffidence that Karl finally persuaded himself to ask, ìWhat did the slab say, Antil? It must be interesting, I judge, considering that youíve taken it with you.î
Antilís reply was simply a sign to hurry, and the Venusian thereupon plunged into the gathering darkness with redoubled speed. Karl was puzzled and rather hurt. He made no further attempt at conversation for the duration of the trip.
When they reached Aphrodopolis , however, the Venusian broke his silence. His puckered face, drawn and haggard, turned to Karl with the expression of one who has come to a painful decision.
ìKarl,î he said, ìwe have been friends, so I wish to give you a bit of friendly advice. You are going to leave for Earth next week. I know your father is high in the councils of the Planetary President. You yourself will probably be a personage of importance in the not-too-distant future. Since this is so, I beg you earnestly to use every atom of your influence to a moderation of Earthís attitude toward Venus. I, in my turn, being a hereditary noble of the largest tribe on Venus, shall do my utmost to repress all attempts at violence.î
The other frowned. ìThere seems to be something behind all this. I donít get it at all. What are you trying to say?î
ìJust this. Unless conditions are bettered-and soon- Venus will rise in revolt. In that case, I will have no choice but to place my services at her feet, and then Venus will no longer be defenceless.î
These words served only to amuse the Earthman. ìCome, Antil, your patriotism is admirable, and your grievances justified, but melodrama and chauvinism donít go with me. I am, above all, a realist.î
There was a terrible earnestness in the Venusianís voice. ìBelieve me, Karl, when I say nothing is more real than what I tell you now. In case of a Venusian revolt, I cannot vouch for Earthís safety.î
ìEarthís safety!î The enormity of this stunned Karl.
ìYes,î continued Antil, ìfor I may be forced to destroy Earth. There you have it.î With this, he wheeled and plunged into the underbrush on the way back to the little Venusian village outside the great dome.
Five years passed-years of turbulent unrest, and Venus stirred in its sleep like an awakening volcano. The shortsighted Terrestrial masters of Aphrodopolis , Venusia , and other domed cities cheerfully disregarded all danger signals. When they thought of the little green Venusians at all, it was with a disdainful grimace as if to say, ìOh, THOSE things!î
But ìthose thingsî were finally pushed beyond endurance, and the nationalistic Green Bands became increasingly vociferous with every passing day. Then, on one grey day, not unlike the grey days preceding, crowds of natives swarmed upon the cities in organized rebellion.
The smaller domes, caught by surprise, succumbed. In rapid succession New Washington, Mount Vulcan , and St. Denis were taken, together with the entire eastern continent, Before the reeling Terrestrials realized what was happening, half of Venus was no longer theirs.
Earth, shocked and stunned by this sudden emergency-which, of course, should have been foreseen-sent arms and supplies to the inhabitants of the remaining beleaguered towns and began to equip a great space fleet for the recovery of the lost territory.
Earth was annoyed but not frightened, knowing that ground lost by surprise could easily be regained at leisure, and that ground not now lost would never be lost. Or such, at least, was the belief.
Imagine, then, the stupefaction of Earthís leaders as no pause came in the Venusian advance. Venusia City had been amply stocked with weapons and food; her outer defences were up, the men at their posts. A tiny army of naked, unarmed natives approached and demanded unconditional surrender. Venusia refused haughtily, and the messages to Earth were mirthful in their references to the unarmed natives who had become so recklessly flushed with success.
Then, suddenly, no more messages were received, and the natives took over Venusia .
The events at Venusia were duplicated, over and over again, at what should have been impregnable fortresses. Even Aphrodopolis itself, with half a million population, fell to a pitiful five hundred Venusians. This, in spite of the fact that every weapon known to Earth was available to the defenders.
The Terrestrial Government suppressed the facts, and Earth itself remained unsuspecting of the strange events on Venus; but in the inner councils, statesmen frowned as they listened to the strange words of Karl Frantor, son of the Minister of Education.
Jan Heersen, Minister of War, rose in anger at the conclusion of the report.
ìDo you wish us to take seriously the random statement of a half-mad Greenie and make our peace with Venus on its own terms? That is definitely and absolutely impossible. What those damned beasts need is the mailed fist. Our fleet will blast them out of the Universe, and it is time that it were done.î
ìThe blasting may not be so simple, Heersen,î said the gray-haired, elder Frantor, rushing to his sonís defence. ìThere are many of us who have all along claimed that the Government policy toward the Venusians was all wrong. Who knows what means of attack they have found and what, in revenge, they will do with it?î
ìFairy Tales!î exclaimed Heersen. ìYou treat the Greenies as if they were people. Theyíre animals and should be thankful for the benefits of civilization we brought them. Remember, weíre treating them much better than some of our own Earth races were treated in our early history, the Red Indians for example.î
Karl Frantor burst in once more in an agitated voice. ìWe must investigate, sirs! Antilís threat is too serious to disregard, no matter how silly it sounds-and in the light of the Venusian conquests, it sounds anything but silly. I propose that you send me with Admiral von Blumdorff, as a sort of envoy. Let me get to the bottom of this before we attack them.î
The saturnine Earth President, Jules Debuc, spoke now for the first time. ìFrantorís proposal is reasonable, at least. It shall be done. Are there any objections?î
There were none, though Heersen scowled and snorted angrily. Thus, a week later, Karl Frantor accompanied the space armada of Earth when it set off for the inner planet.
It was a strange Venus that greeted Karl after his five yearsí absence. It was still its old soaking self, its old dreary, monotony of white and grey, its scattering of domed cities-and yet how different.
Where before the haughty Terrestrials had moved in disdainful splendour among the cowering Venusians, now the natives maintained undisputed sway. Aphrodopolis was a native city entirely, and in the office of the former governor sat -Antil.
Karl eyed him doubtfully, scarcely knowing what to say. ìI rather thought you might be king-pin,î he managed at length. ìYou-the pacifist.î
ìThe choice was not mine. It was that of circumstance,î Antil replied. ìBut you, I did not expect you to be your planetís spokesman.î
ìIt was to me that you made your silly threat years ago, and so it is I who was most pessimistic concerning your rebellion. I come, you see, but not unaccompanied.î His hand motioned vaguely upward, where spaceships lazed motionless and threatening.
ìYou come to menace me?î
ìNo! To hear your aims and your terms.î
ìThat is easily accomplished. Venus demands its independence and we promise friendship, together with free and unrestricted trade.î
ìAnd you expect us to accept all that without a struggle.î
ìI hope you do-for Earthís own sake.î
Karl scowled and threw himself back in his chair in annoyance, ìFor Godís sake, Antil, the time for mysterious hints and bogies has passed. Show your hand. How did you overcome Aphrodopolis and the other cities so easily?î
ìWe were forced to it, Karl. We did not desire it.î Antilís voice was shrill with agitation. ìThey would not accept our fair terms of surrender and began to shoot their Tonite guns. We-we had to use the-the weapon. We had to kill most of them afterward-out of mercy.î
ìI donít follow. What weapon are you talking about?î
ìDo you remember that time in the ruins of Ash-tai-wr, Karl? The hidden room; the ancient inscription; the five little rods.î
Karl nodded sombrely. ìI thought so, but I wasnít sure.î
ìIt was a horrible weapon, Karl.î Antil hurried on as if the mere thought of it were not to be endured. ìThe ancients discovered it-but never used it. They hid it instead, and why they did not destroy it, I canít imagine. I wish they had destroyed it; I really do. But they didnít and I found it and I must use it-for the good of Venus.î
His voice sank to a whisper, but with a manifest effort he nerved himself to the task of explanation. ìThe little harmless rods you saw then, Karl, were capable of producing a force field of some unknown nature (the ancients wisely refused to be explicit there) which has the power of disconnecting brain from mind.î
ìWhat?î Karl stared in open-mouthed surprise. ìWhat are you talking about?î
ìWhy, you must know that the brain is merely the seat of the mind, and not the mind itself. The nature of ëmindí is a mystery, unknown even to our ancients; but whatever it is, it uses the brain as its intermediary to the world of matter.î
ìI see. And your weapon divorces mind from brain- renders mind helpless-a space-pilot without his controls.î
Antil nodded solemnly. ìHave you ever seen a decerebrated animal?î he asked suddenly.
ìWhy, yes, a dog-in my bio course back in college.î
ìCome, then, I will show you a decerebrated human.î
Karl followed the Venusian to an elevator. As he shot downward to the lowest level-the prison level-his mind was in a turmoil. Tom between horror and fury, he had alternate impulses of unreasoning desire to escape and almost insuperable yearnings to slay the Venusian at his side. In a daze, he left the cubicle and followed Antil down a gloomy corridor, winding its way between rows of tiny, barred cells.
There.î Antilís voice roused Karl as would a sudden stream of cold water. He followed the pointing webbed hand and stared in fascinated revulsion at the human figure revealed.
It was human, undoubtedly, in form-but inhuman, nevertheless. It (Karl could not imagine it as ìheî) sat dumbly on the floor, large staring eyes never leaving the blank wall before him. Eyes that were empty of soul, loose lips from which saliva drooled, fingers that moved aimlessly. Nauseated, Karl turned his head hastily.
ìHe is not exactly decerebrated.î Antilís voice was low. ìOrganically, his brain is perfect and unharmed. It is merely -disconnected.î
ìHow does it live, Antil? Why doesnít it die?î
ìBecause the autonomic system is untouched. Stand him up and he will remain balanced. Push him and he will regain his balance. His heart beats. He breathes. If you put food in his mouth, he will swallow, though he would die of starvation before performing the voluntary act of eating food that has been placed before him. It is life-of a sort; but it were better dead, for the disconnection is permanent.î
ìIt is horrible-horrible.î
ìIt is worse than you think. I feel convinced that somewhere within the shell of humanity, the mind, unharmed, still exists. Imprisoned helplessly in a body it cannot control, what must be that mindís torture?î
Karl stiffened suddenly. ìYou shanít overcome Earth by sheer unspeakable brutality. It is an unbelievably cruel weapon but no more deadly than any of a dozen of ours. You shall pay for this.î
ìPlease, Karl, you have no conception of one-millionth of the deadliness of the ëDisconnection Fieldí. The Field is independent of space, and perhaps of time, too, so that its range can be extended almost indefinitely. Do you know that it required merely one discharge of the weapon to render every warm-blooded creature in Aphrodopolis helpless?î Antilís voice rose tensely. ìDo you know that I am able to bathe ALL EARTH in the Field-to render all your teeming billions the duplicate of that dead-alive hulk in there AT ONE STROKE.î
Karl did not recognize his own voice as he rasped, ìFiend! Are you the only one who knows the secret of this damnable Field?î
Antil burst into a hollow laugh, ìYes, Karl, the blame rests on me, alone. Yet killing me will not help. If I die, there are others who know where to find the inscription, others who have not my sympathy for Earth. I am perfectly safe from you, Karl, for my death would be the end of your world.î
The Earthman was broken-utterly. Not a fragment of doubt as to the Venusianís power was left within him. ìI yield,î he muttered, ìI yield. What shall I tell my people?î
ìTell them of my terms, and of what I could do if I wished.î
Karl shrank from the Venusian as if his very touch was death, ìI will tell them that.î
ìTell them also, that Venus is not vindictive. We do not wish to use our weapon, for it it too dreadful to use. If they will give us our independence on our own terms, and allow us certain wise precautions against future re-enslavement, we will hurl each of our five guns and the explanatory inscription explaining it into the sun.î
The Terrestrialís voice did not change from its toneless whisper. ìI will tell them that.î
Admiral von Blumdorff was as Prussian as his name, and his military code was the simple one of brute force. So it was quite natural that his reactions to Karlís report were explosive in their sarcastic derision.
ìYou forsaken fool,î he raved at the young man. ëThis is what comes of talk, of words, of tomfoolery. You dare come back to me with this old-wivesí tale of mysterious weapons, of untold force. Without any proof at all, you accept all that this damned Greenie tells you at absolute face value, and surrender abjectly. Couldnít you threaten, couldnít you bluff, couldnít you lie?î
ìHe didnít threaten, bluff, or lie,î Karl answered warmly. ìWhat he said was the gospel truth. If you had seen the decerebrated man-î
ìBah! That is the most inexcusable part of the whole cursed business. To exhibit a lunatic to you, some perfectly normal mental defective, and to say, ëThis is our weapon!í and for you to accept that without question! Did they do anything but talk? Did they demonstrate the weapon? Did they even show it to you?î
ìNaturally not. The weapon is deadly. Theyíre not going to kill a Venusian to satisfy me. As for showing me the weapon -well, would you show your ace-in-the-hole to the enemy? Now you answer me a few questions. Why is Antil so cocksure of himself? How did he conquer all Venus so easily?î
ìI canít explain it I admit, but does that prove that theirs is the correct explanation? Anyhow, Iím sick of this talk. Weíre attacking now, and to hell with theories. Iíll face them with Tonite projectiles and you can watch their bluff backfire in their ugly faces.î
ìBut, Admiral, you must communicate my report to the President.î
ìI will-after I blow Aphrodopolis into kingdom come.î
He turned on the central broadcasting unit. ìAttention, all ships! Battle formation! We dive at Aphrodopolis with all Tonites blasting in fifteen minutes.î Then he turned to the orderly. ìHave Captain Larsen inform Aphrodopolis that they have fifteen minutes to hoist the white flag.î
The minutes that ticked by after that were tense and nervewracking for Karl Frantor. He sat in bent silence, head buried in his hands and the faint click of the chronometer at the end of every minute sounded like a thunder-clap in his ears. He counted those clicks in a mumbling whisper-8-9-10. God!
Only five minutes to certain death! Or was it certain death? Was von Blumdorff right? Were the Venusians putting over a daring bluff?
An orderly catapulted into the room and saluted. ìThe Greenies have just answered, sir.î
ìWell,î von Blumdorff leaned forward eagerly.
ìThey say, ëUrgently request fleet not to attack. If done, we shall not be responsible for the consequences.íì
ìIs that all?î came the outraged shout
ìYes, sir.î
The Admiral burst into a sulphurous stream of profanity. ìWhy, the infernal gall of them,î he shouted. ìThey dare bluff to the very end.î
And as he finished, the fifteenth minute clicked off, and the mighty armada burst into motion. In streaking, orderly flight they shot down toward the cloudy shroud of the second planet. Von Blumdorff grinned in a grisly appreciation of the awesome view spread over the televisor-until the mathematically precise battle formation suddenly broke.
The Admiral stared and rubbed his eyes. The entire further half of the fleet had suddenly gone crazy. First, the ships wavered; then they veered and shot off at mad angles.
Then calls came in from the sane half of the fleet-reports that the left wing had ceased to respond to radio.
The attack on Aphrodopolis was immediately disrupted as the order went out to capture the ships that had run amok. Von Blumdorff stamped up and down and tore his hair. Karl Frantor cried out dully, ìIt is their weapon,î and lapsed back into his former silence.
From Aphrodopolis came no word at all.
For two solid hours the remnant of the Terrestrial fleet battled their own ships. Following the aimless courses of the stricken vessels, they approached and grappled. Bound together then by rigid force, rocket blasts were applied until the insane flight of the others had been balanced and stopped,
Fully twenty of the fleet were never caught; some continuing on some orbit about the sun, some shooting off into unknown space, a few crashing down to Venus.
When the remaining ships of the left wing were boarded, the unsuspecting boarding parties stopped short in horror. Seventy-five staring witless shells of humanity in each ship . Not a single human being left.
Some of the first to enter screamed in horror and fled in a panic. Others merely retched and turned away their eyes. One officer took in the situation at a glance, calmly drew his Atomo-pistol and rayed every decerebrate in sight.
Admiral von Blumdorff was a stricken man; a pitiful, limp wreck of his former proud and blustering self, when he heard the worst. One of the decerebrates was brought to him, and he reeled back.
Karl Frantor gazed at him with red-rimmed eyes, ìWell, Admiral, are you satisfied?î
But the Admiral made no answer. He drew his gun, and before anyone could stop him, shot himself through the head.
Once again Karl Frantor stood before a meeting of the President and his Cabinet, before a dispirited, frightened group of men. His report was definite and left no doubt as to the course that must now be followed.
President Debuc stared at the decerebrate brought in as an exhibit. ìWe are finished,î he said. ìWe must surrender unconditionally, throw ourselves upon their mercy. But someday-,î his eyes kindled in retribution.
ìNo, Mr. President!î Karlís voice rang out, ìthere shall be no someday. We must give the Venusians their simple due- liberty and independence. Bygones must be bygones-our dead have but paid for the half-century of Venusian slavery. After this, there must be a new order in the Solar System- the birth of a new day.î
The President lowered his head in thought and then raised it again. ìYou are right,î he answered with decision; ìthere shall be no thought of revenge.î
Two months later the peace treaty was signed and Venus became what it has remained ever since-an independent and sovereign power. And with the signing of the treaty, a whirling speck shot out toward the sun. It was-the weapon too dreadful to use.



***



Amazing Storieswas, at that time, heavily slanted toward adventure and action and disapproved of too much scientific exposition in the course of the story. I, of course, even then was writing the kind of science fiction that involved scientific extrapolation that was specifically described. What Raymond Palmer did in this case was to omit some of my scientific discussion and to place in footnotes a condensed version of passages that he could not omit without damaging the plot. This was an extraordinarily inept device, at which I chafed at the time. I took the only retaliation available to me. I placed Amazing at the bottom of the list, as far as the order in which to submit stories was concerned.
What I remember most clearly about the story, though, is Fred Pohlís remark concerning it. The story ends with Earth and Venus at peace, with Earth promising to respect Venusí independence and Venus destroying its weapon. Fred said, upon reading the published story, ìAnd after the weapon was destroyed, Earth wiped the Venusians off the face of their planet.î
He was quite right. I was naive enough then to suppose that words and good intentions are sufficient. (Fred also remarked that the weapon that was too dreadful to be used was , in fact, used. He was right in that case, too, and that helped sour me on titles that were too long and elaborate. I have tended toward shorter titles since, even one-word titles, something Campbell consistently encouraged, perhaps because short titles fit better on the cover and on the title page of a magazine.)
If I thought that my sale to Campbell had made me an expert in knowing what he wanted and in being able to supply that want, I was quite wrong. In February 1939 I wrote a story called ìThe Decline and Fall.î I submitted it to Campbell on February 21 and it was back in my lap, quite promptly, on the twenty-fifth. It made the rounds thereafter without results and was never published. It no longer exists and I remember nothing at all about it.
On March 4, 1939, I began my most ambitious writing project to that date. It was a novelette (in which I named an important character after Russell Winterbotham) that was intended to be at least twice as long as any of my previous stories. I called the story ìPilgrimage.î It was my first attempt to write ìfuture historyî; that is, a tale about a far future time written as though it were a historical novel. I was also my first attempt to write a story on a galactic scale.
I was very excited while working at it and felt somehow that it was an ìepic.î (I remember, though, that Winterbotham was rather dubious about it when I described the plot to him in a letter.) I brought it in to Campbell on March 21, 1939, with high hopes, but it was back on the twenty-fourth with a letter that said, ìYou have a basic idea which might be made into an interesting yarn, but as it is, it is not strong enough.î
This time I would not let go. I was in to see Campbell again on the twenty-seventh and talked him into letting me revise it in order to strengthen the weaknesses he found in it. I brought in the second version on April 25, and it, too, was found wanting, but this time it was Campbell who asked for a revision. I tried again and the third version was submitted on May 9 and rejected on the seventeenth. Campbell admitted there was still the possibility of saving it, but, after three tries, he said, I should put it to one side for some months and then look at it from a fresh viewpoint.
I did as he said and waited two months (the minimum time I could interpret as ìsome monthsî) and brought in the fourth version on August 8.
This time, Campbell hesitated over it till September 6, and then rejected it permanently on the ground that Robert A. Heinlein had just submitted an important short novel (later published as ìIf This Goes On-î) that had a religious theme. Since ìPilgrimageî also had a religious theme, John couldnít use it. Two stories on so sensitive a subject in rapid succession were one too many.
I had written the story four times, but I saw Campbellís point. Campbell said Heinleinís story was the better of the two and I could see that an editor could scarcely be expected to take the worse and reject the better simply because writing the worse had been such hard work.
There was nothing, however, to prevent me from trying to sell it elsewhere. I kept trying for two years, during which time I rewrote it twice more and retitled it ìGalactic Crusade.î
Eventually I sold it to another of the magazines that were springing up in the wake of Campbellís success with Astounding . This was Planet Stories , which during the 1940s was to make its mark as a home for the ìspace opera,î the blood-and-thunder tale of interplanetary war. My story was of this type, and the editor of Planet , Malcolm Reiss, was attracted.
The religious angle worried him, too, however. Would I go through the story, he asked during luncheon on August 18, 1941, and remove any direct reference to religion. Would I, in particular, refrain from referring to any of my characters as ìpriests.î Sighing, I agreed, and the story was revised for a sixth time. On October 7, 1941, he accepted it and, after two and a half years that included ten rejections, the story was finally placed.
But, having put me to the trouble of that particular remove-the-religion revision, what did Reiss do? Why, he retitled it (without consulting me, of course) and called the story ìBlack Friar of the Flame.î
I might mention two points about this story before presenting it.
First, it was the only story I ever sold to Planet .
Second, it was illustrated by Frank R. Paul. Paul was the most prominent of all the science fiction illustrators of the pre-Campbell era, and, to the best of my knowledge, this is the only time our paths crossed professionally.
I did see him once from a distance, though. On July 2, 1939, I attended the First World Science Fiction Convention, which was held in Manhattan. Frank Paul was guest of honor. It was the first occasion on which I was publicly recognized as a professional, rather than as merely a fan. With three published stories under my belt (ìTrendsî had just appeared) I was pushed up to the platform to take a bow. Campbell was sitting in an aisle seat and he waved me toward the platform delightedly, I remember.
I said a few words, referring to myself as the ìworst science fiction writer unlynched.î I didnít mean it, of course, and I doubt that anyone thought for a moment that I did.








Black Friar of the Flame


Russell Tymballís eyes were filled with gloomy satisfaction as they gazed at the blackened ruins of what had been a cruiser of the Lhasinuic Fleet a few hours before. The twisted girders, scattered in all directions, were ample witness of the terrific force of the crash.
The pudgy Earthman re-entered his own sleek Strato-rocket and waited. Fingers twisted a long cigar aimlessly for minutes before lighting it. Through the up-drifting smoke, his eyes narrowed and he remained lost in thought
He came to his feet at the sound of a cautious hail. Two men darted in with one last fugitive glance behind them. The door closed softly, and one stepped immediately to the controls. The desolate desert landscape was far beneath them almost at once, and the silver prow of the Strato-rocket pointed for the ancient metropolis of New York.
Minutes passed before Tymball spoke, ìAll clear?î
The man at the controls nodded. ìNot a tyrant ship about. Itís quite evident the ëGrahulí had not been able to radio for help.î
ìYou have the dispatch?î the other asked eagerly.
ìWe found it easily enough. It is unharmed.î
ìWe also found,î said the second man bitterly, ìone other thing-the last report of Sidi Peller.î
For a moment, Tymballís round face softened and something almost like pain entered his expression. And then it hardened again, ìHe died! But it was for Earth, and so it was not death. It was martyrdom!î
Silence, and then sadly, ìLet me see the report, Petri.î
He took the single, folded sheet handed him and held it before him. Slowly, he read aloud:
ìOn September 4, made successful entry into ëGrahulí cruiser of the tyrant fleet. Maintained self in hiding during passage from Pluto to Earth. On September 5, located dispatch in question and assumed possession. Have just shorted rocket jets. Am sealing this report in with dispatch. Long live Earth!î
Tymballís voice was strangely moved as he read the last word. ìThe Lhasinuic tyrants have never martyrized a greater man than Sidi Peller. But weíll be repaid, and with interest The Human Race is not quite decadent yet.î
Petri stared out the window. ìHow did Peller do it all? One man-to stow away successfully upon a cruiser of the fleet and in the face of the entire crew to steal the dispatch and wreck the fleet. How was it done? And weíll never know; except for the bare facts in his report.î
ìHe had his orders,íì said Willums, as he locked controls and turned about. ìI carried them to him on Pluto myself. Get the dispatch! Wreck the ëGrahulí in the Gobi! He did it! Thatís all!î He shrugged his shoulders wearily.
The atmosphere of depression deepened until Tymball himself broke it was a growl. ìForget it. Did you take care of everything at the wreck?î
The other two nodded in unison. Petriís voice was businesslike, ìAll traces of Peller were removed and de-atomized. They will never detect the presence of a Human among the wreckage. The document itself was replaced by the prepared copy, and carefully burnt beyond recognition. It was even impregnated with silver salts to the exact amount contained in the official seal of the Tyrant Emperor. Iíll stake my head that no Lhasinu will suspect that the crash was no accident or that the dispatch was not destroyed by it.î
ìGood! They wonít locate the wreck for twenty-four hours at least. Itís an airtight job. Let me have the dispatch now.î
He fondled the metalloid container almost with reverence. It was blackened and twisted, still faintly warm. And then with a savage twist of the wrist, he tore off the lid.
The document that he lifted out unrolled with a rustling sound. At the lower left hand corner was the huge silver seal of the Lhasinuic Emperor himself-the tyrant, who from Vega, ruled one third of the Galaxy. It was addressed to the Viceroy of Sol.
The three Earthmen regarded the fine print solemnly. The harshly angular Lhasinuic script glinted redly in the rays of the setting sun.
ìWas I right?î whispered Tymball.
ìAs always,î assented Petri.
Night did not really fall. The skyís black-purple deepened ever so slightly and the stars brightened imperceptibly, but aside from that the stratosphere did not differentiate between the absence and the presence of the sun.
ìHave you decided upon the next step?î asked Willums, hesitantly.
ìYes-long ago. Iím going to visit Paul Kane tomorrow, with this,î and he indicated the dispatch.
ì Loara Paul Kane!î cried Petri.
ìThat-that Loarist !î came simultaneously from Willums. ìThe Loarist,î agreed Tymball. ìHe is our man!î
ìSay rather that he is the lackey of the Lhasinu,î ground out Willums. ìKane-the head of Loarism-consequently the head of the traitor Humans who preach submission to the Lhasinu.î
ìThatís right,î Petri was pale but more calm. ìThe Lhasinu are our known enemies and are to be met in fair fight-but the Loarists are vermin. Great Space! I would rather throw myself on the mercy of the tyrant Viceroy himself than have anything to do with those snuffling students of ancient history, who praise the ancient glory of Earth and encompass its present degradation.î
ìYou judge too harshly.î There was the trace of a smile about Tymballís lips. ìI have had dealings with this leader of Loarism before. Oh-î he checked the cries of startled dismay that rose, ìI was quite discreet about it. Even you two didnít know, and, as you see, Kane has not yet betrayed me. I failed in those dealings, but I learned a little bit. Listen to me!î
Petri and Willums edged nearer, and Tymball continued in crisp, matter-of-fact tones, ìThe first Galactic Drive of the Lhasinu ended two thousand years ago just after the capture of Earth. Since then, the aggression has not been resumed, and the independent Human Planets of the Galaxy are quite satisfied at the maintenance of the status quo. They are too divided among themselves to welcome a return of the struggle. Loarism itself is only interested in its own survival against the encroachments of newer ways of thought, and it is no great moment to them whether Lhasinu or Human rules Earth as long as Loarism itself prospers. As a matter of fact, we-the Nationalists-are perhaps a greater danger to them in that respect than the Lhasinu.î
Willums smiled grimly, ìIíll say we are.î
ìThen, granting that, it is natural that Loarism assume the role of appeasement. Yet, if it were to their interests, they would join us at a secondís notice. And this,î he slapped the document before him, ìis what will convince them where their interests lie.î
The other two were silent.
Tymball continued, ìOur time is short. Not more than three years, perhaps not more than two. And yet you know what the chances of success for a rebellion today are.î
ìWeíd do it,î snarled Petri, and then in a muffled tone, ìif the only Lhasinu we had to deal with were those of Earth.î
ìExactly. But they can call upon Vega for help, and we can call upon no one. No one of the Human Planets would stir in our defense, any more than they did five hundred years ago. And thatís why we must have Loarism on our side.î
ìAnd what did Loarism do five hundred years ago during the Bloody Rebellion?î asked Willums, bitter hatred in his voice. ìThey abandoned us to save their own precious hides.î
ìWe are in no position to remember that,î said Tymball. ìWe will have their help now-and then, when all is over, our reckoning with them-î
Willums returned to the controls, ìNew York in fifteen minutes!î And then, ìBut I still donít like it. What can those filthy Loarists do ? Dried out husks fit for nothing but treason and platitudes!î
ìThey are the last unifying force of Humanity,î answered Tymball. ìWeak enough now and helpless enough, but Earthís only chance.î
They were slanting downwards now into the thicker, lower atmosphere, and the whistling of the air as it streamed past them became shriller in pitch. Willums fired the braking rockets as they pierced a gray layer of clouds. There upon the horizon was the great diffuse glow of New York City.
ìSee that our passes are in perfect order for the Lhasinuic inspection and hide the document. They wonít search us, anyway.î
Loara Paul Kane leaned back in his ornate chair. The slender fingers of one hand played with the ivory paperweight upon his desk. His eyes avoided those of the smaller, rounder man before him, and his voice, as he spoke, took on solemn inflections.
ìI cannot risk shielding you longer, Tymball. I have done so until now because of the bond of common Humanity between us, but-î his voice trailed away.
ìBut?î prompted Tymball.
Kaneís fingers turned his paperweight over and over. ìThe Lhasinu are growing harsher this past year. They are almost arrogant.î He looked up suddenly. ìI am not quite a free agent, you know, and havenít the influence and power you seem to think I have.î
His eyes dropped again, and a troubled note entered his voice, ìThe Lhasinu suspect. They are beginning to detect the workings of a tightly-knit conspiracy underground, and we cannot afford to become entangled in it.î
ìI know. If necessary, you are quite willing to sacrifice us as your predecessor sacrificed the patriots five centuries ago. Once again, Loarism shall play its noble part.î
ìWhat good are your rebellions?î came the weary reply. ìAre the Lhasinu so much more terrible than the oligarchy of Humans that rules Santanni or the dictator that rules Trantor? If the Lhasinu are not Human, they are at least intelligent Loarism must live at peace with the rulers.î
And now Tymball smiled. There was no humor in it- rather mocking irony, and from his sleeve, he drew forth a small card.
ìYou think so, do you? Here, read this. It is a reduced photostat of-no, donít touch it-read it as / hold it, and-î
His further remarks were drowned in the sudden hoarse cry from the other. Kaneís face twisted alarmingly into a mask of horror, as he snatched-desperately at the reproduction held out to him.
ìWhere did you get this?î He scarcely recognized his own voice.
ìWhat odds? I have it, havenít I? And yet it cost the life of a brave man, and a ship of His Reptilian Eminenceís navy. I believe you can see that there is no doubt as to the genuineness of this.î
ìNo-no!î Kane put a shaking hand to his forehead. ìThat is the Emperorís signature and seal. It is impossible to forge them.î
ìYou see. Excellency,î there was sarcasm in the title, ìthe renewal of the Galactic Drive is a matter of two years-or three-in the future. The first step in the drive comes within the year-and it is concerning that first step,î his voice took on a poisonous sweetness, ìthat this order has been issued to the Viceroy.î
ìLet me think a second. Let me think.î Kane dropped into his chair.
ìIs there the necessity?î cried Tymball, remorselessly. ìThis is nothing but the fulfillment of my prediction of six months ago, to which you would not listen. Earth, as a Human world, is to be destroyed; its population scattered in groups throughout the Lhasinuic portions of the Galaxy; every trace of Human occupancy destroyed.î
ìBut Earth, Earth, the home of the Human Race; the beginning of our civilization.î
ìExactly! Loarism is dying and the destruction of Earth will kill it And with Loarism gone, the last unifying force is destroyed, and the human planets, invincible when united, shall be wiped out, one by one, in the Second Galactic Drive. Unless-î
The otherís voice was toneless.
ìI know what youíre going to say.î
ìNo more than I said before. Humanity must unite, and can do so only about Loarism. It must have a Cause for which to fight, and that Cause must be the liberation of Earth. I shall fire the spark here on Earth and you must convert the Human portion of the Galaxy into a powder-keg.î
ìYou wish a Total War-a Galactic Crusade,î Kane spoke in a whisper, ìyet who should know better than I that a Total War has been impossible for these thousand years.î He laughed suddenly, harshly, ìDo you know how weak Loarism is today?î
ìNothing is so weak that it cannot be strengthened. Although Loarism has weakened since its great days during the First Galactic Drive, you still have your organization and your discipline; the best in the Galaxy. And your leaders are, as a whole, capable men, I must say that for you. A thoroughly centralized group of capable men, working desperately, can do much. It must do much, for it has no choice.î
ìLeave me,î said Kane, brokenly, ìI can do no more now. I must think.î His voice trailed away, but one finger pointed toward the door.
ìWhat good are thoughts?î cried Tymball, irritably. ìWe need deeds!î And with that, he left.
The night had been a horrible one for Kane. His face was pale and drawn; his eyes hollow and feverishly brilliant. Yet he spoke loudly and firmly.
ìWe are allies, Tymball.î
Tymball smiled bleakly, took Kaneís outstretched hand for a moment, and dropped it, ìBy necessity. Excellency, only. I am not your friend.î
ìNor I yours. Yet we may work together. My initial orders have gone out and the Central Council will ratify them. In that direction, at least, I anticipate no trouble.î
ìHow quickly may I expect results?î
ìWho knows? Loarism still has its facilities for propaganda. There are still those who will listen from respect and others from fear, and still others from the mere force of the propaganda itself. But who can say? Humanity has slept, and Loarism as well. There is little anti-Lhasinuic feeling, and it will be hard to drum it up out of nothing.î
ìHate is never hard to drum up,î and Tymballís moon-face seemed oddly harsh. ìEmotionalism! Propaganda! Frank and unscrupulous opportunism! And even in its weakened state, Loarism is rich. The masses may be corrupted by words, but those in high places, the important ones, will require a bit of the yellow metal.î
Kane waved a weary hand, ìYou preach nothing new. That line of dishonor was Human policy far back in the misty dawn of history when only this poor Earth was Human and even it split into warring segments.î Then, bitterly, ìTo think that we must return to the tactics of that barbarous age.î
The conspirator shrugged his shoulders cynically, ìDo you know any better?î
ìAnd even so, with all that foulness, we may yet fail.î
ìNot if our plans are well-laid.î
Loara Paul Kane rose to his feet and his hands clenched before him, ìFool! You and your plans! Your subtle, secret, snaky, tortuous plans! Do you think that conspiracy is rebellion, or rebellion, victory? What can you do? You can ferret out information and dig quietly at the roots, but you canít lead a rebellion. I can organize and prepare, but I canít lead a rebellion.î
Tymball winced, ìPreparation-perfect preparation-î
ì-is nothing, I tell you. You can have every chemical ingredient necessary, and all the proper conditions, and yet there may be no reaction. In psychology-particularly mob psychology-as in chemistry, one must have a catalyst.î
ìWhat in space do you mean?î
ìCan you lead a rebellion?î cried Kane. ìA crusade is a war of emotion. Can you control the emotions? Why, you conspirator, you could not stand the light of open warfare an instant. Can I lead the rebellion? I, old and a man of peace? Then who is to be the leader, the psychological catalyst, that can take the dull worthless clay of your precious ëpreparationí and breathe life into it?î
Russell Tymballís jaw muscles quivered, ìDefeatism! So soon?î
The answer was harsh, ìNo! Realism!î
There was angry silence and Tymball turned on his heel and left.
It was midnight, ship time, and the eveningís festivities were reaching their high point. The grand salon of the superliner Flaming Nova was filled with whirling, laughing, glittering figures, growing more convivial as the night wore on.
ìThis reminds me of the triply-damned affairs my wife makes me attend back on Lacto,î muttered Sammel Maronni to his companion. ìI thought Iíd be getting away from some of it, at least out here in hyperspace, but evidently I didnít.î He groaned softly and gazed at the assemblage with a faintly disapproving stare.
Maronni was dressed in the peak of fashion, from purple headsash to sky-blue sandals, and looked exceedingly uncomfortable. His portly figure was crammed into a brilliantly red and terribly tight tunic and the occasional jerks at his wide belt showed that he was only too conscious of its ill fit.
His companion, taller and slimmer, bore his spotless white uniform with an ease born of long experience, and his imposing figure contrasted strongly with the slightly ridiculous appearance of Sammel MaronnL
The Lactonian exporter was conscious of this fact. ìBlast it, Drake, youíve got one fine job here. You dress like a nob and do nothing but look pleasant and answer salutes. How much do you get paid, anyway?î
ìNot enough.î Captain Drake lifted one gray eyebrow and stared quizzically at the Lactonian. ìI wish you had my job for a week or so. Youíd sing mighty small after that. If you think taking care of fat dowager damsels and curly-headed society snobs is a bed of roses, youíre welcome to it.î He muttered viciously to himself for a moment and then bowed politely to a bejeweled harridan who simpered past. ìItís whatís grayed my hair and furrowed my brow, by Rigel.î
Maronni drew a long Karen smoke out of his waist-pouch and lit up luxuriously. He blew a cloud of apple-green smoke into the Captainís face and smiled impishly.
ìIíve never heard the man yet who didnít knock his own job, even when it was the pushover yours is, you hoary old fraud. Ah, if Iím not mistaken, the gorgeous Ylen Surat is bearing down upon us.î
ìOh, pink devils of Sirius! Iím afraid to look. Is that old hag actually moving in our direction?î
ìShe certainly is-and arenít you the lucky one! Sheís one of the richest women on Santanni and a widow, too. The uniform gets them, I suppose. What a pity Iím married.î
Captain Drake twisted his face into a most frightful grimace, ìI hope a chandelier falls on her.î
And with that he turned, his expression metamorphosed into one of bland delight in an instant, ìWhy, Madam Surat, I thought Iíd never get the chance to see you tonight.î
Ylen Surat, for whom the age of sixty was past experience, giggled girlishly, ìBe still, you old flirt, or youíll make me forget that Iíve come here to scold you.î
ìNothing is wrong, I hope?î Drake felt a sinking of the heart. He had had previous experience with Madam Suratís complaints. Things usually were wrong.
ìA great deal is wrong. Iíve just been told that in fifty hours, we shall land on Earth-if thatís the way you pronounce the word.î
ìPerfectly correct,î answered Captain Drake, a bit more at ease.
ìBut it wasnít listed as a stop when we boarded.î
ìNo, it wasnít. But then, you see, itís.quite a routine affair. We leave ten hours after landing.î
ìBut this is insupportable. It will delay me an entire day. It is necessary for me to reach Santanni within the week, and days are precious. Now, Iíve never heard of Earth. My guide book,î she extracted a leather-covered volume from her reticule and flipped its pages angrily, ìdoesnít even mention the place. No one, I feel sure, has any interest in a halt there. If you persist in wasting the passengersí time in a perfectly useless stop, I shall take it up with the president of the line. Iíll remind you that I have some little influence back home.î
Captain Drake sighed inaudibly. It had not been the first time he had been reminded of Ylen Suratís ìlittle influence.î ìMy dear madam, you are right, entirely right, perfectly right-but I can do nothing. All ships on the Sirius, Alpha Centauri, and 61 Cygni lines must stop at Earth. It is by interstellar agreement, and even the president of the line, no matter how stimulated he may be by your argument, could do nothing.î
ìBesides,î interrupted Maronni, who thought it time to come to the aid of the beleaguered captain, ìI believe that we have two passengers who are actually headed for Earth.î
ìThatís right. I had forgotten.î Captain Drakeís face brightened a bit. ìThere! We have concrete reason for the stop as well.î
ìTwo passengers out of over fifteen hundred! Reason, indeed!î
ìYou are unfair,î said Maronni, lightly. ìAfter all, it was on Earth that the Human race originated. You know that, I suppose?î
Ylen Surat lifted patently false eyebrows, ìDid we?î
The blank look on her face twisted to one of disdain, ìOh, well, that was all thousands and thousands of years ago. It doesnít matter any more.î
ìIt does to the Loarists and the two who wish to land are Loarists.î
ìDo you mean to say,î sneered the widow, ìthat there are still people in this enlightened age who go about studying ëour ancient culture.í Isnít that what theyíre always talking about?î
ìThatís what Filip Sanat is always talking about,î laughed Maronni. ìHe gave me a long sermon only a few days ago on that very subject. And it was interesting, too. There was a lot to what he said.î
He nodded lightly and continued, ìHeís got a good head on him, that Filip Sanat. He might have made a good scientist or businessman.î
ìSpeak of meteors and hear them whizz,î said the Captain, suddenly, and nodded his head to the right.
ìWell!î gasped Maronni. ìThere he is. But-but what in space is he doing here?î
Filip Sanat did make a rather incongruous picture as he stood framed in the far doorway. His long, dark purple tunic -mark of the Loarist-was a sombre splotch upon an otherwise gay scene. His grave eyes turned toward Maronni and he lifted his hand in immediate recognition.
Astonished dancers made way automatically as he passed, staring at him long and curiously afterwards. One could hear the wake of whispering that he left in his path. Filip Sanat, however, took no notice of this. Eyes fixed stonily ahead of him and expression stolidly immobile, he reached Captain Drake, Sammel Maronni, and Ylen Surat
Filip Sanat greeted the two men warmly and then, in response to an introduction, bowed gravely to the widow, who regarded him with surprise and open disdain.
ìPardon me for disturbing you. Captain Drake,î said the young man, in a low tone. ìI only want to know at what time we are leaving hyperspace.î
The captain yanked out a corpulent pocket-chromo. ìAn hour from now. Not more.î
ìAnd we shall then be-?î
ìJust outside the orbit of Planet IX.î
ìThat would be Pluto. Sol will then be in sight as we enter normal space?î
ìIf youíre looking in the right direction, it will be-toward the prow of the ship.î
ìThank you,î Filip Sanat made as if to depart, but Maronni detained him.
ìHold on there, Filip, youíre not going to leave us, are you? Iím sure Madam Surat here is fairly dying to ask you several questions. She has displayed a great interest in Loarism.î There was more than the suspicion of a twinkle in the Lactonianís eye.
Filip Sanat turned politely to the widow, who, taken aback for the moment, remained speechless, and then recovered.
ìTell me, young man,î she burst forth, ìare there really still people like you left?-Loarists, I mean.î
Filip Sanat started and stared quite rudely at his questioner, but did lose his tongue. With calm distinctness, he said, ìThere are still people left who try to maintain the culture and way of life of ancient Earth.î
Captain Drake could not forbear a tiny bit of irony, ìEven down to the culture of the Lhasinuic masters?î
Ylen Surat uttered a stifled scream, ìDo you mean to say Earth is a Lhasinuic world? Is it?î Her voice rose to a frightened squeak.
ìWhy, certainly,î answered the puzzled captain, sorry that he had spoken. ìDidnít you know?î
ìCaptain,î there was hysteria in the womanís voice. ìYou must not land. If you do, I shall make trouble-plenty of trouble. I will not be exposed to hordes of those terrible Lhasinu-those awful reptiles from Vega.î
ìYou need not fear. Madam Surat,î observed Filip Sanat, coldly. ìThe vast majority of Earthís population is very much human. It is only the one percent that rules that is Lhasinuic.î
ìOh-î A pause, and then, in a wounded manner, ìWell, I donít think Earth can be so important, if it is not even ruled by Humans. Loarism indeed! Silly waste of time, I call it!î
Sanatís face flushed suddenly, and for a moment he seemed to struggle vainly for speech. When he did speak, it was in an agitated tone, ìYou have a very superficial view. The fact that the Lhasinu control Earth has nothing to do with the fundamental problem of Loarism which-î
He turned on his heel and left.
Sammel Maronni drew a long breath as he watched the retreating figure. ìYou hit him in a sore spot, Madam Surat, I never saw him squirm away from an argument or an attempt at an explanation in that way before.î
ìHeís not a bad looking chap,î said Captain Drake.
Maronni chuckled, ìNot by a long shot. Weíre from the same planet, that young fellow and I. Heís a typical Lactonian, like me.î
The widow cleared her throat grumpily, ìOh, let us change the subject by all means. That person seems to have cast a shadow over the entire room. Why do they wear those awful purple robes? So unstylish!î
Loara Broos Porin glanced up as his young acolyte entered.
ìWell?î
ìIn less than forty-five minutes, Loara Broos.î
And throwing himself into a chair, Sanat leaned a flushed and frowning face upon one balled fist.
Porin regarded the other with an affectionate smile, ìHave you been arguing with Sammel Maronni again, Filip?î
ìNo, not exactly.î He jerked himself upright. ìBut whatís the use, Loara Broos? There, on the upper level, are hundreds of Humans, thoughtless, gaily dressed, laughing, frolicking; and there outside is Earth, disregarded. Only we two of the entire shipís company are stopping there to view the world of our ancient days.î
His eyes avoided those of the older man and his voice took on a bitter tinge, ìAnd once thousands of Humans from every corner of the Galaxy landed on Earth every day. The great days of Loarism are over.î
Loara Broos laughed. One would not have thought such a hearty laugh to be in his spindly figure. ìThat is at least the hundredth time I have heard that said by you. Foolish! The day will come when Earth will once more be remembered. People will yet again flock. By the thousands and millions theyíll come.î
ìNo! It is over!î
ìBah! The croaking prophets of doom have said that over and over again through history. They have yet to prove themselves right.î
ìThis time they will.î Sanatís eyes blazed suddenly, ìDo you know why? It is because Earth is profaned by the reptile conquerors. A woman has just said to me-a vain, stupid, shallow woman-that T donít think Earth can be so important if it is not even ruled by Humans.í She said what billions must say unconsciously, and I hadnít the words to refute her. It was one argument I couldnít answer.î
ìAnd what would your solution be, Filip? Come, have you thought it out?î
ìDrive them from Earth! Make it a Human planet once more! We fought them once during the First Galactic Drive two thousand years ago, and stopped them when it seemed as if they might absorb the Galaxy. Let us make a Second Drive of our own and hurl them back to Vega.î
Porin sighed and shook his head, ìYou young hothead! There never was a young Loarist who didnít eat fire on the subject. Youíll outgrow it. Youíll outgrow it.î
ìLook, my boy!î Loara Broos arose and grasped the other by the shoulders, ìMan and Lhasinu have intelligence, and are the only two intelligent races of the Galaxy. They are brothers in mind and spirit. Be at peace with them. Donít hate; it is the most unreasoning emotion. Instead, strive to understand.î
Filip Sanat stared stonily at the ground and made no indication that he heard. His mentor clicked his tongue in gentle rebuke.
ìWell, when you are older, you will understand. Now, forget all this, Filip. Remember that the ambition of every real Loarist is about to be fulfilled for you. In two days, we shall reach Earth and its soil shall be under your feet. Isnít that enough to make you happy? Just think! When you return, you shall be awarded the title ëLoara.í You shall be one who has visited Earth. The golden sun will be pinned to your shoulder.î
Porinís hand crept to the staring yellow orb upon his own tunic, mute witness of his three previous visits to Earth.
ìLoara Filip Sanat,î said Sanat slowly, eyes glistening. ìLoara Filip Sanat. It has a wonderful sound, hasnít it? And only a little ways off.î
ìNow, then, you feel better. But come, in a few moments we shall leave hyperspace and we will see Sol.î
Already, even as he spoke, the thick, choking cloak of hyper-stuff that clung so closely to the sides of the Flaming Nova was going through those curious changes that marked the beginning of the shift to normal space. The blackness lightened a bit and concentric rings of various shades of gray chased each other across the port-view with gradually hastening speed. It was a weird and beautiful optical illusion that science has never succeeded in explaining.
Porin clicked off the lights in the room, and the two sat quietly in the dark, watching the feeble phosphorescence of the racing ripples as they sped into a blur. Then, with a terrifying silent suddenness, the whole structure of hyper-stuff seemed to burst apart in a whirling madhouse of brilliant color. And then all was peaceful again. The stars sparkled quietly, against the curved backdrop of normal space.
And up in the corner of the port blazed the brightest spark of the sky with a luminous yellow flame that lit up the faces of the two men into pale, waxen masks. It was Sol!
The birth-star of Man was so distant that it lacked a perceptible disc, yet it was incomparably the brightest object to be seen. In its feeble yellow light, the two remained in quiet thought, and Filip Sanat grew calmer.
In two days, the Flaming Nova landed on Earth.
Filip Sanat forgot the delicious thrill that had seized him. at the moment when his sandals first came into contact with the firm green sod of Earth, when he caught his first glimpse of a Lhasinuic official.
They seemed actually human-or humanoid, at least.
At first glance, the predominantly Manlike characteristics drowned out all else. The body plan differed in no essential from Manís. The four-limbed, bipedal body; the middling-well proportioned arms and legs; the well-defined neck, were all astonishingly in evidence. It was only after a few minutes that the smaller details marking the difference between the two races were noticed at all.
Chief of these were the scales covering the bead and a thick line down the backbone, halfway to the hips. The face itself, with its flat, broad, thinly-scaled nose and lidless eyes was rather repulsive, but in no way bestial. Their clothes were few and simple, and their speech quite pleasant to the ear. And, what was most important, there was no masking the intelligence that showed forth in their dark, luminous eyes.
Porin noted Sanatís surprise at this first glimpse of the Vegan reptiles with every sign of satisfaction.
ìYou see,î he remarked, ìtheir appearance is not at all monstrous. Why should hate exist between Human and Lhasinu, then?î
Sanat didnít answer. Of course, his old friend was right. The word ìLhasinuî had so long been coupled with the words ìalienî and ìmonsterî in his mind, that against all knowledge and reason, he had subconsciously expected to see some weird life-form.
Yet, overlying the foolish feeling this realization induced was the same haunting hate that clung closely to him, growing to fury as they passed inspection by an over-bearing English-speaking Lhasinu.
The next morning, the two left for New York, the largest city of the planet In the historic lore of the unbelievably ancient metropolis, Sanat forgot for a day the troubles of the Galaxy outside. It was a great moment for him when he finally stood before a towering structure and said to himself, ì This is the Memorial.î
The Memorial was Earthís greatest monument, dedicated to the birthplace of the Human race, and this was Wednesday, the day of the week when two men ìguarded the Flame.î Two men, alone in the Memorial, watched over the flickering yellow fire that symbolized Human courage arid Human initiative-and Porin had already arranged that the choice should fall that day upon himself and Sanat, as being two newly-arrived Loarists.
And so, in the fading twilight, the two sat alone in the spacious Flame Room of the Memorial. In the murky semidarkness, lit only by the fitful glare of a dancing yellow flame, a quiet peace descended upon them.
There was something about the brooding aura of the place that wiped all mental disturbance clean away. There was something about the wavering shadows as they weaved through the pillars of the long colonnade on either side, that cast a hypnotic spell.
Gradually, he fell into a half doze, and out of sleepy eyes regarded the Flame intently, until it became a living being of light weaving a dim, silent figure beside him.
But tiny sounds are sufficient to disturb a reverie, especially when contrasted with a hitherto deep silence. Sanat stiffened suddenly, and grasped Porinís elbow in a fierce grip.
ìListen,î he hissed the warning quietly.
Porin started violently out of a peaceful day-dream, regarded his young companion with uneasy intentness, then, without a word, trumpeted one ear. The silence was thicker than ever-also a tangible cloak. Then the faintest possible scraping of feet upon marble, far off. A low whisper, down at the limits of audibility, and then silence again.
ìWhat is it?î he asked bewilderedly of Sanat, who had already risen to his feet.
ìLhasinu!î ground out Sanat, face a mask of hate-filled indignation.
ìImpossible!î Porin strove to keep his voice coldly steady, but it trembled in spite of itself. ìIt would be an unheard-of event. We are just imagining things, now. Our nerves are rubbed raw by this silence, that is all. Perhaps it is some official of the Memorial.î
ìAfter sunset, on Wednesday?î came Sanatís strident voice. ìThat is as illegal as the entrance of Lhasinuic lizards, and far more unlikely. It is my duty as a Guardian of the Flame to investigate this.î
He made as if to walk toward the shadowed door, and Porin caught his wrist fearfully, ìDonít Filip. Let us forget this until sunrise. One can never tell what will happen. What can you do, even supposing that Lhasinu have entered the Memorial? If you-î
But Sanat was no longer listening. Roughly, he shook off the otherís desperate grasp, ìStay here! The Flame must be guarded. I shall be back soon.î
He was already half way across the wide, marble-floored hall. Cautiously, he approached the glass-paned door to the dark, twisting staircase that circled its way upwards through the twilit gloom into the desert recesses of the tower.
Slipping off his sandals, he crept up the stairs, casting one last look back toward the softly luminous Flame, and toward the nervous, frightened figure standing beside it.
The two Lhasinu stared about them in the pearly light of the Atomo lamp.
ìDreary old place,î said Threg Ban Sola. His wrist camera clicked three times. ìTake down a few of those books on the walls. Theyíll serve as additional proof.î
ìDo you think we ought to,î asked Cor Wen Hasta. ìThese Human apes may miss them.î
ìLet them!î came the cool response. ìWhat can they do? Here, sit down!î He flicked a hasty glance upon his chronometer. ìWeíll get fifty credits for every minute we stay, so we might as well pile up enough to last us for a while.î
ìPirat For is a fool. What made him think we wouldnít take the bet?î ë
ìI think,î said Ban Sola, ìheís heard about the soldier torn to pieces last year for looting a European museum. The Humans didnít like it, though Loarism is filthy rich, Vega knows. The Humans were disciplined, of course, but the soldier was dead. Anyway, what Pirat For doesnít know is that the Memorial is deserted Wednesdays. This is going to cost him money.î
ìFifty credits a minute. And itís been seven minutes now.î
ìThree hundred and fifty credits. Sit down. Weíll play a game of cards and watch our money mount.î
Threg Ban Sola drew forth a worn pack of cards from his pouch which, though they were typically and essentially Lhasinuic, bore unmistakable traces of their Human derivation.
ìPut the Atomo-light on the table and Iíll sit between it and the window,î he continued peremptorily, shuffling the cards as he spoke. ìHah! Iíll warrant no Lhasinu ever gamed in such an atmosphere. Why, it will triple the zest of the play.î
Cor Wen Hasta seated himself, and then rose again, ìDid you hear anything?î He stared into the shadows beyond the half-open door.
ìNo,î Ban Sola frowned and continued shuffling. ìYouíre not getting nervous, are you?î
ìOf course not. Still, if they were to catch us here in this blasted tower, it might not be pleasant.î
ìNot a chance. The shadows are making you jumpy.î He dealt the hands.
ìDo you know,î said Wen Hasta, studying his cards carefully, ìit wouldnít be so nice if the Viceroy were to get wind of this, either. I imagine he wouldnít deal lightly with offenders of the Loarists, as a matter of policy. Back on Sirius, where I served before I was shifted, the scum-î
ìScum, all right,î grunted Ban Sola. ìThey breed like flies and fight each other like mad bulls. Look at the creatures!î He turned his cards downward and grew argumentative. ìI mean, look at them scientifically and impartially. What are they? Only mammals! Mammals that can think, in a way; but mammals just the same. Thatís all.î
ìI know. Did you ever visit one of the Human worlds?î
Ban Sola smiled, ìI may, pretty soon.î
ìFurlough?î Wen Hasta registered polite astonishment.
ìFurlough, my scales. With my ship! And with guns shooting!î
ìWhat do you mean?î There was a sudden glint in Wen Hastaís eyes.
Ban Solaís grin grew mysterious. ìThis isnít supposed to be known, even among us officers, but you know how things leak out.î
Wen Hasta nodded, ìI know.î Both had lowered their voices instinctively.
ìWell. The Second Drive will be on, now, any time.î
ìNo!î
ìFact! And weíre starting right here. By Vega, the Viceregal Palace is buzzing with nothing else. Some of the officers have even started a lottery on the exact date of the first move. Iíve got a hundred credits at twenty to one myself. But then, I drew only to the nearest week. You can get a hundred and fifty to one, if youíre nervy enough to pick a particular day.î
ìBut why here on this Galaxy-forsaken planet?î
ìStrategy on the part of the Home Office.î Ban Sola leaned forward. ìThe position weíre in now has us facing a numerically superior enemy hopelessly divided amongst itself. If we can keep them so, we can take them over one by one. The Human Worlds would just naturally rather cut their own throats than co-operate with each other.î
Wen Hasta grinned agreement, ìThatís typical mammalian behavior for you. Evolution must have laughed when she gave a brain to an ape.î
ìBut Earth has particular significance. Itís the center of Loarism, because the Humans originated here. It corresponds to our own Vegan system.î
ìDo you mean that? But you couldnít! This little two-by-four flyspeck?î
ìThatís what they say. I wasnít here at the time, so I wouldnít know. But anyway, if we can destroy Earth, we can destroy Loarism, which is centered here. It was Loarism, the historians say, that united the Worlds against us at the end of the First Drive. No Loarism; the last fear of enemy unification is gone; and victory is easy.î
ìDamned clever! How are we going to go about it?î
ìWell, the word is that theyíre going to pack up every last Human on Earth and scatter them through the subject worlds. Then we can remove everything else on Earth that smells of the Mammals and make it an entirely Lhasinuic world.î
ìBut when?î
ìWe donít know; hence the lottery. But no one has placed his bet at a period more than two years in the future.î
ìHurrah for Vega! Iíll give you two to one I riddle a Human cruiser before you do, when the time comes.î
ìDone,î cried Ban Sola. ìIíll put up fifty credits.î
They rose to touch fists in token and Wen Hasta grinned at his chronometer, ìAnother minute and weíll have an even thousand credits coming to us. Poor Pirat For. Heíll groan. Letís go now; more would be extortionate.î
There was low laughter as the two Lhasinu left, long cloaks swishing softly behind them. They did not notice the slightly darker shadow hugging the wall at the head of the stairs, though they almost brushed it as they passed. Nor did they sense the burning eyes focused upon them as they descended noiselessly.
Loara Broos Porin jerked to his feet with a sob of relief as he saw the figure of Filip Sanat stumble across the hall toward him. He ran to him eagerly, grasping both hands tightly.
ìWhat kept you, Filip? You donít know what wild thoughts have passed through my head this past hour. If you had been gone another five minutes, I would have gone mad for sheer suspense and uncertainty. But whatís wrong?î
It took several moments for Loara Broosí wild relief to subside sufficiently to note the otherís trembling hands, his disheveled hair, his feverishly-glinting eyes; but when it did, all his fears returned.
He watched Sanat in dismay, scarcely daring to press his question for fear of the answer. But Sanat needed no urging. In short, jerky sentences he related the conversation he had overheard and his last words trailed into a despairing silence.
Loara Broosí pallor was almost frightening, and twice he tried to talk with no success other than a few hoarse gasps. Then, finally, ìBut it is the death of Loarism! What is to be done?î
Filip Sanat laughed, as men laugh when they are at last convinced that nothing remains to laugh at. ìWhat can be done? Can we inform the Central Council? You know only too well how helpless they are. The various Human governments? You can imagine how effective those divided fools would be.î
ìBut it canít be true! It simply canít be!î
Sanat remained silent for seconds, and then his face twisted agonizedly and in a voice thick with passion, he shouted, ìI wonít have it. Do you hear? It shanít be! Iíll stop it!î
It was easy to see that he had lost control of himself; that wild emotion was driving him. Porin, large drops of perspiration on his brow, grasped him about the waist, ìSit down, Filip, sit down! Are you going crazy?î
ìNo!î With a sudden push, he sent Porin stumbling backwards into a sitting position, while the Flame wavered and flickered madly in the rush of air, ìIím going sane. The time for idealism and compromise and subservience is gone! The time for force has come! We will fight and, by Space, we will win!î
He was leaving the room at a dead run.
Porin limped after, ìFilip! Filip!î He stopped at the doorway in frightened despair. He could go no further. Though the Heavens fell, someone must guard the Flame.
But-but what was Filip Sanat going to do? And through Porinís tortured mind flickered visions of a certain night, five hundred years before, when a careless word, a blow, a shot, had lit a fire over Earth that was finally drowned in Human blood.
Loara Paul Kane was alone that night. The inner office was empty; the dim, blue light upon the severely simple desk the only illumination in the room. His thin face was bathed in the ghastly light, and his chin buried musingly between his hands.
And then there was a crashing interruption as the door was flung open and a disheveled Russell Tymball knocked off the restraining hands of half a dozen men and catapulted in. Kane whirled in dismay at the intrusion and one hand flew up to his throat as his eyes widened in apprehension. His face was one startled question.
Tymball waved his arm in a quieting gesture. ìItís all right. Just let me catch my breath.î He wheezed a bit and seated himself gently before continuing, ìYour catalyst has turned up, Loara Paul-and guess where. Here on Earth! Here in New York! Not half a mile from where weíre sitting now!î
Loara Paul Kane eyed Tymball narrowly, ìAre you mad?î
ìNot so you can notice it. Iíll tell you about it, if you donít mind turning on a light or.two. You look like a ghost in the blue.î The room whitened under the glare of Atomos, and Tymball continued, ìFemi and I were returning from the meeting. We were passing the Memorial when it happened, and you can thank Fate for the lucky coincidence that led us to the right spot at the right moment.
ìAs we passed, a figure shot out the side entrance, jumped on the marble steps in front, and shouted, ëMen of Earth!í Everyone turned to look-you know how filled Memorial Sector is at eleven-and inside of two seconds, he had a crowd.î
ìWho was the speaker, and what was he doing inside the Memorial? This is Wednesday night, you know.î
ìWhy,î Tymball paused to consider, ìnow that you mention it, he must have been one of the two Guardians. He was a Loarist-you couldnít mistake the tunic. He wasnít Terrestrial, either!î
ìDid he wear the yellow orb?î
ìNo.î
ìThen I know who he was. Heís Porinís young friend. Go ahead.î
ìThere he stood!î Tymball was warming to his task. ìHe was some twenty feet above street level. You have no idea what an impressive figure he made with the glare of the Luxites lighting his face. He was handsome, but not in an athletic, brawny way. He was the ascetic type, if you know what I mean. Pale, thin face, burning eyes, long, brown hair.
ìAnd when he spoke! Itís no use describing it; in order to appreciate it really, you would have to hear him. He began telling the crowd of the Lhasinuic designs; shouting what I had been whispering. Evidently, he had gotten them from a good source, for he went into details-and how he put them! He made them sound real and frightening. He frightened me with them; had me standing there scared blue at what he was saying; and as for the crowd, after the second sentence, they were hypnotized. Every one of them had had ëLhasinuic Menaceí drilled into them over and over again, but this was the first time they listened-actually listened .
ìThen he began damning the Lhasinu. He rang the changes on their bestiality, their perfidy, their criminality-only he had a vocabulary that raked them into the lowest mud of a Venusian ocean. And every time he let loose with an epithet, the crowd stood upon its hind legs and let out a roar. It began to sound like a catechism. ëShall we allow this to go on?í cried he. ëNever!í yelled the crowd. ëMust we yield?í ëNever!í ëShall we resist?í ëTo the end!í ëDown with the Lhasinu!í he shouted. Kill them!í they howled.
ìI howled as loud as any of them-forgot myself entirely.
ìI donít know how long it lasted before Lhasinuic guards began closing in. The crowd turned on them, with the Loarist urging them on. Did you ever hear a mob yell for blood? No? Itís the most awful sound you can imagine. The guards thought so, too, for one look at what was before them made them turn and run for their lives, in spite of the fact that they were armed. The mob had grown into a matter of thousands and thousands by then.
ìBut in two minutes, the alarm siren sounded-for the first time in a hundred years. I came to my senses at last and made for the Loarist, who had not stopped his tirade a moment It was plain that we couldnít let him fall into the hands of the Lhasinu.
ìThe rest is pretty much of a mixup. Squadrons of motorized police were charging down on us, but somehow, Ferni and I managed between the two of us to grab the Loarist, slip out, and bring him here. I have him in the outer room, gagged and tied, to keep him quiet.î
During all the last half of the narrative, Kane had paced the floor nervously, pausing every once in a while in deep consideration. Little flecks of blood appeared on his lower lip.
ìYou donít think,î he asked, ìthat the riot will get out of hand? A premature explosion-î
Tymball shook his head vigorously, ìTheyíre mopping up already. Once the young fellow disappeared, the crowd lost its spirit, anyway.î
ìThere will be many killed or hurt, but- Well, bring in the young firebrand.î Kane seated himself behind his desk and composed his face into a semblance of tranquility.
Filip Sanat was in sad shape as he kneeled before his superior. His tunic was in tatters, and his face scratched and bloody, but the fire of determination shone as brilliantly as ever in his fierce eyes. Russell Tymball regarded him breathlessly as though the previous hourís magic still lingered.
Kane extended his arm gently, ìI have heard of your wild escapade, my boy. What was it that impelled you to do so foolish an act? It might very well have cost you your life, to say nothing of the lives of thousands of others.î
ìFor the second time that night, Sanat repeated the conversation he had overheard-dramatically and in the minutest detail.
ìJust so, just so,î said Kane, with a grim smile, upon the conclusion of the tale, ìand did you think we knew nothing of this? For a long time we have been preparing against this danger, and you have come near to upsetting all our carefully laid plans. By your premature appeal, you might have worked irreparable harm to our cause.î
Filip Sanat reddened, ìPardon my inexperienced enthusiasm-î
ìExactly,î exclaimed Kane. ìYet, properly directed, you might be of great aid to us. Your oratory and youthful fire might work wonders if well managed. Would you be willing to dedicate yourself to the task?î
Sanatís eyes flashed, ìNeed you ask?î
Loara Paul Kane laughed and cast a jubilant side-glance at Russell Tymball, ìYouíll do. In two days, you shall leave for the outer stars. With you, will go several of my own men. And now, you are tired. You will be taken to where you may wash and treat your cuts. Then, you had better sleep, for you shall need your strength in the days to come.î
ìBut-but Loara Broos Porin-my companion at the Flame?î
ìI shall send a messenger to the Memorial immediately. He will tell Loara Broos of your safety and serve as the second Guardian for the remainder of the night. Go, now!î
But even as Sanat, relieved and deliriously happy, rose to go, Russell Tymball leaped from his chair and grasped the older Loaristís wrist in a convulsive grip.
ìGreat Space! Listen!î
The shrill, keening whine that pierced to the inner sanctum of Kaneís offices told its own story. Kaneís face turned haggard.
ìItís martial law!î
Tymballís very lips had turned bloodless, ìWe lost out, after all. Theyíre using tonightís disturbance to strike the first blow. Theyíre after Sanat, and theyíll have him. A mouse couldnít get through the cordon theyíre going to throw about the city now.î
ìBut they mustnít have him.î Kaneís eyes glittered. ìWeíll take him to the Memorial by the Passageway. They wonít dare violate the Memorial.î
ìThey have done it once already,î came Sanatís impassioned cry. ìI wonít hide from the lizards. Let us fight.î
ìQuiet,î said Kane, ìand follow silently.î
A panel in the wall had slid aside, and toward it Kane motioned.
And as the panel closed noiselessly behind them, leaving them in the cold glow of a pocket Atomo lamp, Tymball muttered softly, ìIf they are ready, even the Memorial will yield no protection.î
New York was in ferment. The Lhasinuic garrison had mustered its full strength and placed it in a state of siege. No one might enter. No one might leave. Through the key avenues, rolled the ground cars of the army, while overhead poised the Strato-cars that guarded the airways.
The Human population stirred restlessly. They percolated through the streets, gathering in little knots that broke up at the approach of the Lhasinu. The spell of Sanat lingered, and here and there frowning men exchanged angry whispers.
The atmosphere crackled with tension.
The Viceroy of New York realized that as he sat behind his desk in the Palace, which raised its spires upon Washington Heights. He stared out the window at the Hudson River, flowing darkly beneath, and addressed the uniformed Lhasinu before him.
ìThere must be positive action. Captain. You are right in that. And yet, if possible, an outright break must be avoided. We are woefully undermanned and we havenít more than five third-rate war-vessels on the entire planet.î
ìIt is not our strength but their own fear that keeps them helpless. Excellency. Their spirit has been thoroughly broken in these last centuries. The rabble would break before a single unit of Guardsmen. That is precisely the reason why we must strike hard now. The population has reared and they must feel the whip immediately. The Second Drive may as well begin tonight.î
ìYes,î the Viceroy grimaced wryly. ìWe are caught offstride, but the-er-rabble-rouser must be made an example of. You have him, of course.î
The captain smiled grimly, ìNo. The Human dog had powerful friends. He is a Loarist, you know. Kane-î
ìIs Kane standing against us?î Two red spots burnt over the Viceroyís eyes. ìThe fool presumes! The troops are to arrest the rebel in spite of him-and him, too, if he objects.î
ìExcellency!î the captainís voice rang metallically. ìWe have reason to believe the rebel may be skulking in the Memorial.î
The Viceroy half-rose to his feet. He scowled in indecision and seated himself once more, ìThe Memorial! That presents difficulties!î
ìNot necessarily!î
ìThere are some things those Humans wonít stand.î His voice trailed off uncertainly.
The Captain spoke decisively, ìThe nettle seized firmly does not sting. Quickly done-a criminal could be dragged from the Hall of the Flame itself-and we kill Loarism at a stroke. There could be no struggle after that supreme defiance.î
ìBy Vega! Blast me, if youíre not right. Good! Storm the Memorial!î
The Captain bowed stiffly, turned on his heel, and left the Palace.
Filip Sanat re-entered the Hall of Flame, thin face set angrily, ìThe entire Sector is patrolled by the lizards. All avenues of approach to the Memorial have been shut off.î
Russell Tymball rubbed his jaw, ìOh, theyíre not fools, Theyíve treed us, and the Memorial wonít stop them. As a matter of fact, they may have decided to make this the Day.î
Filip frowned and his voice was thickly furious. ìAnd weíre to wait here, are we? Better to die fighting, than to die hiding.î
ìBetter not to die at all, Filip.î responded Tymball quietly.
There was a moment of silence. Loara Paul Kane sat staring at his fingers.
Finally, he said, ìIf you were to give the signal to strike now, Tymball, how long could you hold out?î
ìUntil Lhasinuic reinforcements could arrive in sufficient numbers to crush us. The Terrestrial garrison, including, the entire Solar Patrol, is not enough to stop us. Without outside help, we can fight effectively for six months at the very least. Unfortunately itís out of the question.î His composure was unruffled.
ìWhy is it out of the question?î
And his face reddened suddenly, as he sprang angrily to his feet, ìBecause you canít just push buttons. The Lhasinu are weak. My men know that, but Earth doesnít. The lizards have one weapon, fear! We canít defeat them, unless the populace is with us, at least passively.î His mouth twisted, ìYou donít know the practical difficulties involved. Ten years, now, Iíve been planning, working, trying. I have an army; and a respectable fleet in the Appalachians. I could set the wheels in motion in all five continents simultaneously. But what good would it do? It would be useless. If I had New York, now-if I were able to prove to the rest of Earth that the Lhasinu were not invincible.î
ìIf I could banish fear from the hearts of Humans?î said Kane softly.
ìI would have New York by dawn. But it would take a miracle.î
ìPerhaps! Do you think you can get through the cordon and reach your men?î
ìI could if I had to. What are you going to do?î
ìYou will know when it happens.î Kane was smiling fiercely. ìAnd when it does happen, strike!î
There was a Tonite gun in Tymballís hand suddenly, as he backed away. His plump face was not at all gentle, ìIíll take a chance, Kane. Good-bye 1î
The captain strode up the deserted marble steps of the Memorial arrogantly. He was flanked on each side by an armed adjutant.
He paused an instant before the huge double-door that loomed up before him and stared at the slender pillars that soared gracefully upwards at its sides.
There was faint sarcasm in his smile, ìImpressive, all this, isnít it?î
ìYes, Captain!î was the double reply.
ìAnd mysteriously dark, too, except for the dim yellow of their Flame. You see its light?î He pointed toward the stained glass of the bottom windows, which glinted flickeringly.
ìYes, Captain!î
ìItís dark, and mysterious, and impressive-and it is about to fall in ruins.î He laughed, and suddenly brought the butt end of his saber down upon the metal carvings on the door in a clanging salvo.
It echoed through the emptiness within and sounded hollowly in the night, but there was no answer.
The adjutant at his left raised his televisor to his ear and caught the faint words issuing therefrom. He saluted, ìCaptain, the Humans are crowding into the sector.î
The captain sneered, ìLet them! Order the guns placed in readiness and aimed along the avenues. Any Human attempting to pass the cordon is to be rayed mercilessly.î
His barked command was murmured into the televisor, and a hundred yards beyond, Lhasinuic Guardsmen put guns in order and aimed them carefully. A low, inchoate murmur went up-a murmur of fear. Men pressed back.
ìIf the door does not open,î said the captain, grimly, ìit is to be broken down.î He raised his saber again, and again there was the thunder of metal on metal.
Slowly, noiselessly, the door yawned wide, and the captain recognized the stem, purple-clad figure that stood before him.
ìWho disturbs the Memorial on the night of the Guarding of the Flame?î demanded Loara Paul Kane solemnly.
ìVery dramatic, Kane. Stand aside!î
ìBack!î The words rang out loudly and clearly. ìThe Memorial may not be approached by the Lhasinu.î
ìYield us our prisoner, and we leave. Refuse, and we will take him by force.î
ìThe Memorial yields no prisoner. It is inviolate. You may not enter.î
ìMake way!î
ìStand back!î
The Lhasinu growled throatily and became aware of a dim roaring. The streets about him were empty, but a block away in every direction was the thin line of Lhasinuic troops, stationed at their guns, and beyond were the Humans. They were massed in noisy thickness and the whites of their faces shone palely in the Chrome-lights.
ìWhat,î gritted the captain to himself, ìdo the scum yet snarl?î His tough skin ridged at the jaws and the scales upon his head uptilted sharply. He turned to the adjutant with the televisor. ìOrder a round over their heads.î
The night was split in two by the purple blasts of energy and the Lhasinu laughed aloud at the silence that followed.
He turned to Kane, who remained standing upon the threshold. ìSo you see that if you expect help from your people, you will be disappointed. The next round will be aimed at head level. If you think that bluff, try me!î
Teeth clicked together sharply, ìMake way!î A Tonite was leveled in his hand, and thumb was firm upon the trigger.
Loara Paul Kane retreated slowly, eyes upon the gun. The captain followed. And as he did so, the inner door of the anteroom swung open and the Hall of the Flame stood revealed. In the sudden draft, the Flame staggered, and at the sight of it, there came a huge shout from the distant spectators.
Kane turned toward it, face raised upwards. The motion of one of his hands was all but imperceptible.
And the Flame suddenly changed. It steadied and roared up to the vaulted ceiling, a blazing shaft fifty feet high. Loara Paul Kaneís hand moved again, and as it did so, the Flame turned carmine. The color deepened and the crimson light of that flaming pillar streamed out into the city and turned the Memorialís windows into staring, bloody eyes.
Long seconds passed, while the captain froze in bewilderment; while the distant mass of Humanity fell into awed silence.
And then there was a confused murmur, which strengthened and grew and split itself into one vast shout.
ìDown with the Lhasinu!î
There was the purple flash of a Tonite from somewhere high above, and the captain came to life an instant too late. Caught squarely, he bent slowly to his death; cold, reptilian face a mask of contempt to the last.
Russell Tymball brought down his gun and smiled sardonically, ìA perfect target against the Flame. Good for Kanel The changing of the Flame was just the emotion-stirring thing we needed. Letís go!î
From the roof of Kaneís dwelling he aimed down upon the Lhasinu below. And as he did, all Hell erupted. Men mushroomed from the very ground, it seemed, weapons in hand. Tonites blazed from every side, before the startled Lhasinu could spring to their triggers.
And when they did so, it was too late, for the mob, white-hot with flaring rage, broke its bounds. Someone shrieked, ìKill the lizards!î and the cry was taken up in one roaring ululation that swelled to the sky.
Like a many-headed monster, the stream of Humanity surged forward, weaponless. Hundreds withered under the belated fury of the defending guns, and tens of thousands scrambled over the corpses, charging to the very muzzles.
The Lhasinu never wavered. Their ranks thinned steadily under the deadly sharp-shooting of the Tymballists, and those that remained were caught by the Human flood that surged over them and tore them to horrible death.
The Memorial sector gleamed in the crimson of the bloody Flame and echoed to the agony of the dying, and the shrieking fury of the triumphant.
It was the first battle of the Great Rebellion, but it was not really a battle, or even madness. It was concentrated anarchy.
Throughout the city, from the tip of Long Island to the mid-Jersey flatlands, rebels sprang from nowhere and Lhasinu went to their death. And as quickly as Tymballís orders spread to raise the snipers, so did the news of the changing of the Flame speed from mouth to mouth and grow in the telling. All New York heaved, and poured its separate lives into the single giant crucible of the ìmob.î
It was uncontrollable, unanswerable, irresistible. The Tymballists followed helplessly where it led, all efforts at direction hopeless from the start.
Like a mighty river, it lashed its way through the metropolis, and where it passed no living Lhasinu remained.
The sun of that fateful morning arose to find the masters of Earth occupying a shrinking circle in upper Manhattan. With the cool courage of born soldiers, they linked arms and withstood the charging, shrieking millions. Slowly, they backed away; each building a skirmish; each block a desperate battle. They split into isolated groups; defending first a building, and then its upper stories, and finally its roof.
With the noonday sun boiling down, only the Palace itself remained. Its last desperate stand held the Humans at bay. The withering circle of fire about it paved the grounds with blackened bodies. The Viceroy himself from his throneroom directed the defense; his own hand upon the butt of a semiportable.
And then, when the mob had finally come to a pause, Tymball seized his opportunity and took the lead. Heavy guns clanked to the front Atomos and delta-rays, from the rebel stock and from the stores captured the previous night, pointed their death-laden muzzles at the Palace.
Gun answered gun, and the first organized battle of machines flared into desperate fury. Tymball was an omnipresent figure, shouting, directing, leaping from gun-emplacement to gun-emplacement, firing his own band Tonite defiantly at the Palace.
Under a barrage of the heaviest fire, the Humans charged once more and pierced to the walls as the defenders fell back. An Atomo projectile smashed its way into the central tower and there was a sudden inferno of fire.
That blaze was the funeral pyre of the last of the Lhasinu in New York. The blackening walls of the palace crumbled in, in one vast crash; but to the very last, room blazing about him, face horribly cut, the Viceroy stood his ground, aiming into the thick of the besieging force. And when his semi-portable expended the last dregs of its power and expired, he heaved it out the window in a last futile gesture of defiance, and plunged into the burning Hell at his back.
Above the Palace grounds at sunset, with a yet-roaring furnace as the background, there floated the green flag of independent Earth.
New York was once more Human.
Russell Tymball was a sorry figure when he entered the Memorial once more that night. Clothes in tatters, and bloody from head to foot from the undressed cut on his cheek, he surveyed the carnage about him with sated eyes.
Volunteer squads, occupied in removing the dead and tending to the wounded had not yet succeeded in making more than a dent in the deadly work of the rebellion.
The Memorial was an improvised hospital. There were few wounded, for energy weapons deal death; and of these few, almost none slightly. It was a scene of indescribable confusion, and the moans of the hurt and dying mingled horribly with the distant yells of celebrating war-drunk survivors.
Loara Paul Kane pushed through the crowding attendants to Tymball.
ìTell me; is it over?î His face was haggard.
ìThe beginning is. The Terrestrial Flag flies over the ruins of the Palace.î
ìIt was horrible! The day has-has-î He shuddered and closed his eyes, ìIf I had known in advance, I would rather have seen Earth dehumanized and Loarism destroyed.î
ìYes, it was bad. But the results might have been much more dearly bought, and yet have remained cheap at the price. Whereís Sanat?î
ìIn the courtyard-helping with the wounded. We all are. It-it-î Again his voice failed him.
There was impatience in Tymballís eyes, and he shrugged weary shoulders, ìIím not a callous monster, but it had to be done, and as yet it is only the beginning. Todayís events mean little. The uprising has taken place over most of Earth, but without the fanatic enthusiasm of the rebellion in New York. The Lhasinu arenít defeated, or anywhere near defeated; make no mistake about that Even now the Solar Guard is flashing to Earth, and the forces on the outer planets are being called back. In no time at all, the entire Lhasinuic Empire will converge upon Earth and the reckoning will be a terrible and bloody one. We must have help!î
He grasped Kane by the shoulders and shook him roughly. ìDo you understand? We must have help! Even here in New York the first flush of victory will fade by tomorrow. We must have help!î
ìI know,î said Kane tonelessly. ìIíll get Sanat and he can leave today.î He sighed, ìIf todayís action was any criterion of his power as a catalyst, we may expect great events.î
Sanat climbed into the little two-man cruiser half an hour later and took his seat beside Petri at the controls.
He extended his hand to Kane a last time, ìWhen I come back it will be with a navy behind me.î
Kane grasped the young manís hand tightly, ìWe depend upon you, Filip.î He paused and said slowly, ìGood luck, Loara Filip Sanat!î
Sanat flushed with pleasure at the title as he resumed his seat once more. Petri waved and Tymball called out, ìWatch out for the Solar Guard!î
The airlock clanged shut, and then, with a coughing roar, the pigmy cruiser was off into the heavens.
Tymball followed it to where it dwindled into a speck and less and then turned to Kane. ìAll is now in the hands of Fate. And, Kane, just how was that Changing of the Flame worked? Donít tell me the Flame turned red of itself.î
Kane shook his head slowly, ìNo! That carmine blaze was the result of opening a hidden pocket of strontium salts, originally placed there to impress the Lhasinu in case of need. The rest was chemistry.î
Tymball laughed grimly, ìYou mean the rest was mob psychology! And the Lhasinu, I think, were impressed-and how! î
Space itself gave no warning, but the mass-detector buzzed. It buzzed peremptorily and insistently. Petri stiffened in his seat and said, ìWeíre in none of the meteor zones.î
Filip Sanat held his breath as the other turned the knob that rotated the peri-rotor. The star-field in the ëvisor shifted with slow dignity, and then they saw it.
It glinted in the sun like half a tiny, orange football, and Petri growled, ìIf theyíve spotted us, weíre sunk.î
ìLhasinuic ship?î
ìShip? Thatís no ship! Thatís a fifty-thousand ton battle cruiser! What in the Galaxy itís doing here, I donít know. Tymball said the Patrol bad made for Earth.î
Sanatís voice was calm, ìThat one hasnít. Can we outrage it?î
ìFat chance!î Petriís fist clenched white on the G-stick. ìTheyíre coming closer.î
The words might have been a signal. The audiomitter jiggled and the harsh Lhasinuic voice started from a whisper and rose to stridence as the radio beam sharpened, ìFire reverse motors and prepare for boarding!î
Petri released the controls and shot a look at Sanat, ìIím only the chauffeur. What do you want to do? We havenít the chance of a meteor against the sun-but if you like the gamble-î
ìWell,î said Sanat, simply, ìweíre not going to surrender, are we?î
The other grinned, as the decelerating rockets blasted, ìNot bad for a Loarist! Can you shoot a mounted Tonite?î
ìIíve never tried!î
ìWell, then, learn how. Grab that little wheel over there and keep your eye on the small ëvisor above. See anything?î Speed was steadily dropping and the enemy ship was approaching.
ìJust stars!î
ìAll right, rotate the wheel-go ahead, further. Try the other direction. Do you see the ship now?î
ìYes! There it is.î
ìGood! Now center it. Get it where the hairlines cross, and for the sake of Sol, keep it there. Now Iím going to turn toward the lizard scum,î siderockets blasted as he spoke, ìand you keep it centered.î
The Lhasinuic ship was bloating steadily, and Petriís voice descended to a tense whisper, ìIím dropping our screen and lunging directly at her. Itís a gamble. If theyíre sufficiently startled, they may drop their screen and shoot; and if they shoot in a hurry, they may miss.î
Sanat nodded silently.
ìNow the second you see the purple flash of the Tonite, pull back on the wheel. Pull back hard ; and pull back fast . If youíre the tiniest trifle late, weíre through.î He shrugged, ìItís a gamble!î
With that, he slammed the G-stick forward hard and shouted, ìKeep it centered!î
Acceleration pushed Sanat back gaspingly, and-the wheel in his sweating hands responded reluctantly to pressure. The orange football wobbled at the center of the ëvisor. He could feel his hands trembling, and that didnít help any. Eyes winced with tension.
The Lhasinuic ship was swelling terribly now, and then, from its prow, a purple sword leaped toward them. Sanat closed his eyes and jerked backwards.
He kept his eyes closed and waited. There was no sound.
He opened them and started to his feet; for Petri, arms akimbo, was laughing down upon him.
ìA beginnerís own luck,î he laughed. ìNever held a gun before in his life and knocks out a heavy cruiser in as pretty a pink as I ever saw.î
ìI hit it?î gasped Sanat.
ìNot on the button, but you did disable it. Thatís good enough. And now, just as soon as we get far enough away from the sun, weíre going into hyperspace.î
The tall, purple-clad figure standing by the central portview gazed longingly at the silent globe without. It was Earth, huge, gibbous, glorious.
Perhaps his thoughts were just a trifle bitter as he considered the six-month period that had just passed. It had begun with a nova-blaze. Enthusiasm kindled to white heat and spread, leaping the stellar gulfs from planet to planet as fast as the hyper-atomic beam. Squabbling governments, sudden putty before the outraged clamoring of their peoples, outfitted fleets. Enemies of centuries made sudden peace and flew under the same green flag of Earth.
Perhaps it would have been too much to expect this love-feast to continue. While it did the Humans were irresistible, One fleet was not two parsecs from Vega itself; another had captured Luna and hovered one light-second above the Earth, where Tymballís ragged revolutionaries still held on doggedly.
Filip Sanat sighed and turned at the sound of a step. White-haired Ion Smitt of the Lactonian contingent entered.
ìYour face tells the story,î said Sanat.
Smitt shook his head, ìIt seems hopeless.î
Sanat turned away again, ìDid you know that weíve gotten word from Tymball today? Theyíre fighting on what they can filch from the Lhasinu. The lizards have captured Buenos Aires, and all South America seems likely to go under their heel. Theyíre disheartened-the Tymballists-and disgusted, and I am, too.î He whirled suddenly, ìYou say that our new needle-ships insure victory. Then, why donít we attack?î
ìWell, for one thing,î the grizzled soldier planted one booted leg on the chair next to him, ìthe reinforcements from Santanni are not coming.î
Sanat started, ìI thought they were on their way. What happened?î
ìThe Santannian government has decided its fleet is required for home defense.î A wry smile accompanied his words.
ìWhat home defense? Why, the Lhasinu are five hundred parsecs away from them.î
Smitt shrugged, ìAn excuse is an excuse and need not make sense. I didnít say that was the real reason.î
Sanat brushed his hair back and his fingers strayed to the yellow sun upon his shoulder, ìEven so! We could still fight, with over a hundred ships. The enemy outnumbers us two to one, but with the needle-ships and with Lunar Base at our backs and the rebels harassing them in the rear-î He fell into a brooding reverie.
ìYou wonít get them to fight, Filip. The Trantorian squadron favors retreat.î His voice was suddenly savage, ìOf the entire fleet, I can trust only the twenty ships of my own squadron-the Lactonian. Oh, Filip, you donít know the dirt of it-you never have known. Youíve won the people to the Cause, but youíve never won the governments. Popular opinion forced them in, but now that they are in, theyíre in only for what they can get.î
ìI canít believe that, Smitt. With victory in their grasp-î
ìVictory? Victory for whom? It is exactly over that bone that the planets are squabbling. At a secret convention of the nations, Santanni demanded control of all the Lhasinuic worlds of the Sirius sector-none of which have been recognized as yet-and was refused. Ah, you didnít know that Consequently, she decides that she must take care of her home defense, and withdraws her various squadrons.î
Filip Sanat turned away in pain, but Ion Smittís voice hammered on, hard, unmerciful.
ìAnd then Trantor realizes that she hates and fears Santanni more than ever she did the Lhasinu and any day now she will withdraw her fleet to refrain from crippling them while her enemyís ships remain quietly and safely in port. The Human nations are falling apart,î the soldierís fist came down upon the table, ìlike rotten cloth. It was a foolís dream to think that the selfish idiots could ever unite for any worthy purpose long.î
Sanatís eyes were suddenly calculating slits, ìWait a while! Things will yet work out all right, if we can only manage to seize control of Earth. Earth is the key to the whole situation.î His fingers drummed upon the table edge. ìIts capture would provide the vital spark. It would drum up Human enthusiasm, now lagging, to the boiling point, and the Governments,-well, they would either have to ride the wave, or be dashed to pieces.î
ìI know that. If we fought today, you have a soldierís word weíd be on Earth tomorrow. They realize it, too, but they wonít fightî
ìThen-then they must be made to fight. The only way they can be made to fight is to leave no alternative. They wonít fight now, because they can retreat whenever they wish, but if-î
He suddenly looked up, face aglow, ìYou know, I havenít been out of the Loarist tunic in years. Do you suppose your clothes will fit me?î
Ion Smitt looked down upon his ample girth and grinned, ìWell, they might not fit you, but theyíll cover you all right.
What are you thinking of doing?î
ìIíll tell you. Itís a terrible chance, but- Relay the following orders immediately to the Lunar Base garrison-î
The admiral of the Lhasinuic Solar squadron was a warscarred veteran who hated two things above all else: Humans and civilians. The combination, in the person of the tall, slender Human in ill-fitted clothing, put a scowl of dislike upon his face.
Sanat wriggled in the grasp of the two Lhasinuic soldiers. ìTell them to let go,î he cried in the Vegan tongue. ìI am unarmed.î
ìSpeak,î ordered the admiral in English. ìThey do not understand your language.î Then, in Lhasinuic to the soldiers, ìShoot when I give the word.î
Sanat subsided, ìI came to discuss terms.î
ìI judged as much when you hoisted the white flag. Yet you come in a one-man cruiser from the night side of your own fleet, like a fugitive. Surely, you cannot speak for your fleet.î
ìI speak for myself.î
ìThen I give you one minute. If I am not interested by the end of that time, you will be shot.î His expression was stony.
Sanat tried once more to free himself, with little success. His captors tightened their grips.
ìYour situation,î said the Earthman, ìis this. You canít attack the Human squadron as long as they control Lunar Base, without serious damage to your own fleet, and you canít risk that with a hostile Earth behind you. At the same time, I happen to know that the order from Vega is to drive the Humans from the Solar System at all costs, and that the Emperor dislikes failures.î
ìYou have ten seconds left,î said the admiral, but tell-tale red spots appeared above his eyes.
ìAll right, then,î came the hurried response, ìhowís this? What if I offer you the entire Human Fleet caught in a trap?î
There was silence. Sanat went on, ìWhat if I show you how you can take over Lunar Base, and surround the Humans?î
ìGo on!î It was the first sign of interest the admiral had permitted himself.
ìI am in command of one of the squadrons and I have certain powers. If youíll agree to our terms, we can have the Base deserted within twelve hours. Two ships,î the Human raised two fingers impressively, ìwill take itî
ìInteresting,î said the Lhasinu, slowly, ìbut your motive? What is your reason for doing this?î
Sanat thrust out a surly under-lip, ìThat would not interest you. I have been ill-treated and deprived of my rights. Besides,î his eyes glittered, ìHumanityís is a lost cause, anyway. For this I shall expect payment-ample payment. Swear to that, and the fleet is yours.î
The admiral glared his contempt ìThere is a Lhasinuic proverb: The Human is steadfast in nothing but his treachery. Arrange your treason, and I shall repay. I swear by the word of a Lhasinuic soldier. You may return to your ships.î
With a motion, he dismissed the soldiers and then stopped them at the doorway, ìBut remember, I risk two ships. They mean little as far as my fleetís strength is concerned, but, nevertheless, if harm comes to a Lhasinuic head through Human treachery-î The scales on his head were stiffly erect and Sanatís eyes dropped beneath the otherís cold stare.
For a long while, the admiral sat alone and motionless. Then he spat ëThis Human filth! It is a disgrace even to fight them!î
The Flagship of the Human fleet lazed one hundred miles above Luna, and within it the captains of the Squadrons sat about the table and listened to Ion Smittís shouted indictment.
ì-I tell you your actions amount to treason. The battle off Vega is progressing, and if the Lhasinu win, their Solar squadron will be strengthened to the point where we must retreat. And if the Humans win, our treachery here exposes their flank and renders the victory worthless. We can win, I tell you. With these new needle-ships-î
The sleepy-eyed Trantorian leader spoke up. ìThe needleships have never been tried before. We cannot risk a major battle on an experiment, when the odds are against us.î
ìThat wasnít your original view, Porcut. You-yes, and the rest of you as well-are a cowardly traitor. Cowards! Cravens!î
A chair crashed backwards as one arose in anger and others followed. Loara Filip Sanat, from his vantage-point at the central port, from where he watched the bleak landscape of Luna below with devouring concentration, turned in alarm. But Jem Porcut raised a gnarled hand for order.
ìLetís stop fencing,î he said. ìI represent Trantor, and I take orders only from her. We have eleven ships here, and Space knows how many at Vega. How many has Santanni got? None! Why is she keeping them at home? Perhaps to take advantage of Trantorís preoccupation. Is there anyone who hasnít heard of her designs against us? Weíre not going to destroy our ships here for her benefit. Trantor will not fight! My division leaves tomorrow! Under the circumstances, the Lhasinu will be glad to let us go in peace.î
Another spoke up, ìAnd Poritta, too. The treaty of Draconis has hung like neutronium around our neck these twenty years. The imperialist planets refuse revision, and we will not fight a war which is to their interest only.î
One after another, surly exclamations dinned the perpetual refrain, ìOur interests are against it! We will not fight!î
And suddenly, Loara Filip Sanat smiled. He had turned away from Luna and laughed at the snarling arguers.
ìSirs,î he said, ìno one is leaving.î
Ion Smitt sighed with relief and sank back in his chair.
ìWho will stop us?î asked Porcut with disdain.
ìThe Lhasinu! They have just taken Lunar Base and we are surrounded.î
The room was a babble of dismay. Shouting confusion held sway and then one roared above the rest, ìWhat of the garrison?î
ìThe garrison had destroyed the fortifications and evacuated hours before the Lhasinu took over. The enemy met with no resistance.î
The silence that followed was much more terrifying than the cries that had preceded. ìTreason,î whispered someone.
ìWho is at the bottom of this?î One by one they approached Sanat. Fists clenched. Faces flushed. ìWho did this?î
ìI did,î said Sanat, calmly.
A moment of stunned disbelief. ìDog!î ìPig of a Loarist!î ìTear his guts out!î
And then they shrank back at the pair of Tonite guns that appeared in Ion Smittís fists. The burly Lactonian stepped before the younger man.
ìI was in on this, too,î he snarled. ìYouíll have to fight now. It is necessary to fight fire with fire sometimes, and Sanat fought treason with treason.î
Jem Porcut regarded his knuckles carefully and suddenly chuckled, ìWell, we canít wriggle out now, so we might as well fight. Except for orders, I wouldnít mind taking a crack at the damn lizards.î
The reluctant pause was followed by shamefaced shouts- proof-positive of the willingness of the rest.
In two hours, the Lhasinuic demand for surrender had been scornfully rejected and the hundred ships of the Human squadron spread outwards on the expanding surface of an imaginary sphere-the standard defense formation of a surrounded fleet-and the Battle for Earth was on.
A space-battle between approximately equal forces resembles in almost every detail a gigantic fencing match in which controlled shafts of deadly radiation are the rapiers and impermeable walls of etheric inertia are the shields.
The two forces advance to battle and maneuver for position. Then the pale purple of a Tonite beam lashes out in a blaze of fury against the screen of an enemy ship, and in so doing, its own screen is forced to blink out. For that one instant it is vulnerable and is a perfect target for an enemy ray, which, when loosed, renders its ship open to attack for the moment. In widening circles, it spreads. Each unit of the fleet, combining speed of mechanism with speed of human reaction, attempts to slip through at the crucial moment and yet maintain its own safety.
Loara Filip Sanat knew all this and more. Since his encounter with the battle cruiser on the way out from Earth, he had studied space war, and now, as the battle fleets fell into line, he felt his very fingers twitch for action.
He turned and said to Smitt, ìIím going down to the big guns.î
Smittís eye was on the grand ëvisor, his hand on the etherwave sender, ìGo ahead, if you wish, but donít get in the way.î
Sanat smiled. The captainís private elevator carried him to the gun levels, and from there it was five hundred feet through an orderly mob of gunners and engineers to Tonite One. Space is at a premium in a battleship. Sanat could feel the crampedness of the room in which individual Humans dovetailed their work smoothly to create the gigantic machine that was a giant dreadnaught.
He mounted the six steep steps to Tonite One and motioned the gunner away. The gunner hesitated; his eye fell upon the purple tunic, and then he saluted and backed reluctantly down the steps.
Sanat turned to the co-ordinator at the gunís visiplate, ìDo ï you mind working with me? My speed of reaction has been tested and grouped 1-A. I have my rating card, if youíd care to see it.î
The co-ordinator flushed and stammered, ìNo, sir! Itís an honor to work with you, sir.î
The amplifying system thundered, ìTo your stations!î and a deep silence fell, in which the cold purr of machinery sounded its ominous note.
Sanat spoke to the co-ordinator in a whisper, ìThis gun covers a full quadrant of space, doesnít it?î
ìYes, sir.î
ìGood, see if you can locate a dreadnaught with the sign of a double sun in partial eclipse.î
There was a long silence. The co-ordinatorís sensitive hands were on the Wheel, delicate pressure turning it this way and that, so that the field in view on the visiplate shifted. Keen eyes scanned the ordered array of enemy ships.
ìThere it is,î he said. ìWhy, itís the flagship.î
ìExactly! Center that ship!î
As the Wheel turned, the space-field reeled, and the enemy flagship wobbled toward the point where the hairlines crossed. The pressure of the co-ordinatorís fingers became lighter and more expert.
ìCentered!î he said. Where the hairlines crossed the tiny oval globe remained impaled.
ìKeep it that way!î ordered Sanat, grimly. ìDonít lose it for a second as long as it stays in our quadrant. The enemy admiral is on that ship and weíre going to get him, you and I.î
The ships were getting within range of each other and Sanat felt tense. He knew it was going to be close-very close. The Humans had the edge in speed, but the Lhasinu were two to one in numbers.
A flickering beam shot out, another, ten more.
There was a sudden blinding flash of purple intensity!
ìFirst hit,î breathed Sanat. He relaxed. One of the enemy ships drifted off helplessly, its stem a mass of fused and glowing metal.
The opposing ships were not at close grips. Shots were being exchanged at blinding speed. Twice, a purple beam showed at the extreme limits of the visiplate and Sanat realized with a queer sort of shiver down his spine that it was one of the adjacent Tonites of their own ship that was firing.
The fencing match was approaching a climax. Two flashes blazed into being, almost simultaneously, and Sanat groaned. One of the two had been a Human ship. And three times there came that disquieting hum as Atomo-engines in the lower level shot into high gear-and that meant that an enemy beam directed at their own ship had been stopped by the screen.
And, always, the co-ordinator kept the enemy flagship centered. An hour passed; an hour in which six Lhasinu and four Human ships had been whiffed to destruction; an hour in which the Wheel turned fractions of a degree this way, that way; in which it swivelled on its universal socket mere hairlines in half a dozen directions.
Sweat matted the co-ordinatorís hair and got into his eyes; his fingers half-lost all sensation, but that flagship never left the ominous spot where the hairlines crossed.
And Sanat watched; finger on trigger-watched-and waited.
Twice the flagship had glowed into purple luminosity, its guns blazing and its defensive screen down; and twice Sanatís finger had quivered on the trigger and refrained. He hadnít been quick enough.
And then Sanat rammed it home and rose to his feet tensely. The co-ordinator yelled and dropped the Wheel.
In a gigantic funeral pyre of purple-hued energy, the flagship with the Lhasinuic Admiral inside had ceased to exist.
Sanat laughed. His hand went out, and the co-ordinatorís came to meet it in a firm grasp of triumph.
But the triumph did not last long enough for the co-ordinator to speak the first jubilant words that were welling up in his throat, for the visiplate burst into a purple bombshell as five Human ships detonated simultaneously at the touch of deadly energy shafts.
The amplifiers thundered, ìUp screens! Cease firing! Ease into Needle formation!î
Sanat felt the deadly pall of uncertainty squeeze his throat. He knew what had happened. The Lhasinu had finally managed to set up their big guns on Lunar Base; big guns with three times the range of even the largest ship guns-big guns that could pick off Human ships with no fear of reprisal.
And so the fencing match was over, and the real battle was to start. But it was to be a real battle of a type never before fought, and Sanat knew that that was the thought in every manís mind. He could see it in their grim expressions and feel it in their silence.
It might work! And it might not!
The Earth squadron had resumed its spherical formation and drifted slowly outwards, its offensive batteries silent. The Lhasinu swept in for the kill. Cut off from power supply as the Earthmen were, and unable to retaliate with the gigantic guns of the Lunar batteries commanding near-by space, it seemed only a matter of time before either surrender or annihilation.
The enemy Tonite beams lashed out in continuous blasts of energy, and tortured screens on Human ships sparked and fluoresced under the harsh whips of radiation.
Sanat could hear the buzz of the Atomo-engines rise to a protesting squeal. Against his will, his eye flicked to the energy gauge, and the quivering needle sank as he watched, moving down the dial at perceptible speed.
The co-ordinator licked dry Ups, ìDo you think weíll make it, sir?î
ìCertainly!î Sanat was far from feeling his expressed confidence. ìWe need hold out for an hour-provided they donít fall back.î
And the Lhasinu didnít. To have fallen back would have meant a thinning of the lines, with a possible break-through and escape on the part of the Humans.
The Human ships were down to crawling speed-scarcely above a hundred miles an hour. Idling along, they crept up the purple beams of energy, the imaginary sphere increasing in size, the distance between the opposing forces ever narrowing.
But inside the ship, the gauge-needle was dropping rapidly, and Sanatís heart dropped with it. He crossed the gun level to where hard-bitten soldiers waited at a gigantic and gleaming lever, in anticipation of an order that had to come soon-or never.
The distance between opponents was now only a matter of one or two miles-almost contact from the viewpoint of space warfare-and then that order shot over the shielded etheric beams from ship to ship.
It reverberated through the gun level:
ìOut needles!î
A score of hands reached for the lever, Sanatís among them, and jerked downwards. Majestically, the lever bent in a curving are to the floor and as it did so, there was a vast scraping noise and a sharp thud that shook the ship.
The dreadnaught had become a ìneedle ship!î
At the prow, a section of armor plate had slid aside and a glittering shaft of metal had lunged outward viciously. One hundred feet long, it narrowed gracefully from a base ten feet in diameter to a needle-sharp diamond point. In the sunlight, the chrome-steel of the shaft gleamed in flaming splendor.
And every other ship of the Human squadron was likewise equipped. Each had become ten, fifteen, twenty, fifty thousand tons of driving rapier.
Swordfish of space!
Somewhere in the Lhasinuic fleet, frantic orders must have been issued. Against this Oldest of all naval tactics-old even in the dim dawn of history when rival triremes had maneuvered and rammed each other to destruction with pointed prows-the super-modem equipment of a space-fleet has no defense.
Sanat forced his way to the visiplate and strapped himself into an anti-acceleration seat, and he felt the springs absorb the backward jerk as the ship sprang into sudden acceleration.
He didnít bother with that, though. He wanted to watch the battle! There wasnít one here, nor anywhere in the Galaxy, that risked what he did. They risked only their lives; and he risked a dream that he had, almost single-handed, created out of nothing.
He had taken an apathetic Galaxy and driven it into revolt against the reptile. He had taken an Earth on the point of destruction and dragged it from the brink, almost unaided. A Human victory would be a victory for Loara Filip Sanat and no one else.
He, and Earth, and the Galaxy were now lumped into one and thrown into the scale. And against it was weighed the outcome of this last battle, a battle hopelessly lost by his own purposeful treachery, unless the needles won.
And if they lost, the gigantic defeat-the ruin of Humanity-was also his.
The Lhasinuic ships were jumping aside, but not fast enough. While they were slowly gathering momentum and drifting away, the Human ships had cut the distance by three quarters. On the screen, a Lhasinuic ship had grown to colossal proportions. Its purple whip of energy had gone out as every ounce of power had gone into a man-killing attempt at rapid acceleration.
And nevertheless its image grew and the shining point that could be seen at the lower end of the screen aimed like a glittering javelin at its heart.
Sanat felt he could not bear the tension. Five minutes and he would take his place as the Galaxyís greatest hero-or its greatest traitor! There was a horrible, unbearable pounding of blood in his temples.
Then it came.
Contact!!
The screen went wild in a chaotic fury of twisted metal. The anti-acceleration seats shrieked as springs absorbed the shock. Things cleared slowly. The screenview veered wildly as the ship slowly steadied. The shipís needle had broken, the jagged stump twisted awry, but the enemy vessel it had pierced was a gutted wreck.
Sanat held his breath as he scanned space. It was a vast sea of wrecked ships, and on the outskirts tattered remnants of the enemy were in flight, with Human ships in pursuit.
There was the sound of colossal cheering behind him and a pair of strong hands on his shoulders.
He turned. It was Smitt-Smitt, the veteran of five wars, with tears in his eyes.
ìFilip,î he said, ìweíve won. Weíve just received word from Vega. The Lhasinuic Home Fleet has been smashed- and also with the needles. The war is over, and weíve woo
Youíve won, Filip! You! î
His grip was painful, but Loara Filip Sanat did not mind that. For a single, ecstatic moment, he stood motionless, face transfigured.
Earth was free! Humanity was saved!



***



For some reason, possibly because of the awful title, for which I emphatically disclaim responsibility, ìBlack Friar of the Flameî is taken as the quintessence of my early incompetence. At least, fans who come across a copy think they can embarrass me by referring to it.
Well, it isnít good, I admit, but it has its interesting points.
For one thing, it is an obvious precursor to my successful ìFoundationî series. In ìBlack Friar of the Flame,î as in the ìFoundationî series, human beings occupy many planets; and two worlds mentioned in the former, Trantor and Santanni, also play important roles in the latter. (Indeed, the first of the ìFoundationî series was to appear only a couple of months after ìBlack Friar of the Flame,î thanks to the delay in selling the latter.)
Furthermore, there is also a strong suggestion in ìBlack Friar of the Flameî of my first book-length novel. Pebble in the Sky , which was to appear eight years later. In both, the situation I pictured on Earth was inspired by that of Judea under the Romans. The climactic battle in ìBlack Friar of the Flame,î however, was inspired by that of the Battle of Salamis, the great victory of the Greeks over the Persians. (In telling future-history I always felt it wisest to be guided by past-history. This was true in the ìFoundationî series, too.)
ìBlack Friar of the Flameî cured me forever, by the way, of attempting repeated revisions. There may well be a connection between the consensus that the story is a poor one and the fact that it was revised six times. I know that there are writers who revise and revise and revise, polishing everything to a high gloss, but I canít do that.
It is my habit now to begin by typing a first draft without an outline. I compose freely on the typewriter though I am frequently questioned about this by readers who seem to think an initial draft can be only in pencil. Actually, writing by hand begins to hurt my wrist after fifteen minutes or so, is very slow, and is hard to read. I can type, on the other hand, ninety words a minute and keep that up for hours without difficulty. As for outlines, I tried one once and it was disastrous, like trying to play the piano from inside a straitjacket.
Having completed the first draft, I go over it and correct it in pen and ink. I then retype the whole thing as the final copy. I revise no more, of my own volition. If ah editor asks for a clearly defined revision of a minor nature, with the philosophy of which I agree, I oblige. A request for a major, top-to-bottom revision, or a second revision after the first, is another matter altogether. Then I do refuse.
This is not out of arrogance or temperament. It is just that too large a revision, or too many revisions, indicate that the piece of writing is a failure. In the time it would take to salvage such a failure, I could write a new piece altogether and have infinitely more fun in the process. (Doing a revision is something like chewing used gum.) Failures are therefore put to one side and held for possible sale elsewhere-for what is a failure to one editor is not necessarily a failure to another.
About the time I was working on ìBlack Friar of the Flameî I was becoming enmeshed in fan activities. I had joined an organization called ìThe Futurians,î which contained a group of ardent science fiction readers, almost all of whom were to become important in the field as writers or editors or both. Included among them were Frederik Pohl, Donald A. Wollheim, Cyril Kornbluth, Richard Wilson, Damon Knight, and so on.
As I had occasion to say before, I became particularly friendly with Pohl. During the spring and summer of 1939, he visited me periodically, looking over my manuscripts and announcing that I had the ìbest bunch of rejected storiesî he had ever seen.
The possibility began to arise that he might be my agent. He was no older than myself, but he had a great deal more practical experience with editors and knew a great deal more about the field. I was tempted, but was afraid this might mean I would not be allowed to see Campbell any more, and I valued my monthly visits with him too much to risk it.
In May 1939 I wrote a story I called ìRobbie,î and on the twenty-third of that month I submitted it to Campbell. It was the first robot story I had ever written and it contained the germ of what later came to be known as the ìThree Laws of Robotics.î Fred read my carbon and at once said it was a good story but that Campbell would reject it because it had a weak ending plus other shortcomings. Campbell did reject it on June 6, for precisely the reasons Pohl had given me.
I was very impressed by that, and any hesitation I had with respect to letting him represent me vanished-but I specified that his agentship must be confined to editors other than Campbell.
I gave him ìRobbieî after the rejection, but he didnít succeed in selling it either, though he even submitted it to a British science fiction magazine (something I would myself never have thought of doing). In October 1939, however, he himself became editor of Astonishing Stories and Super Science Stories , and he therefore ceased being my agent. [A decade later he became my agent again for a few years. I never enjoyed being represented, however, and except for Pohl on these two occasions, I have never had an agent, despite the vast and complicated nature of my writing commitments. Nor do I intend ever having one.]
On March 25, 1940, however, he did as editor what he couldnít do as agent. He placed the story-by taking it himself.
It appeared in Super Science Stories under a changed title. (Pohl was always changing titles.) He called the story ìStrange Playfellow,î a miserable choice, in my opinion. Eventually the story was included as the first of the nine connected ìpositronic robotî series that made up my book I, Robot . In the book, I restored the/title to the original ìRobbie,î and it has appeared as ìRobbieî in every form in which the story has been published since.
Fifteen years later, a daughter was born to me. She was named Robyn and I call her Robbie. I have been asked more than once whether there is a connection. Did I deliberately give her a name close to ìrobotî because I made such a success of my robot stories? The answer is a flat negative. The whole thing is pure coincidence.
One more thing- In the course of my meeting with Campbell on June 6, 1939 (the one in which he rejected ìRobbieî), I met a by then quite well established science fiction writer, L. Sprague de Camp. That started a close friendship -perhaps my closest within the science fiction fraternity-ï that has continued to this day.
In June 1939 I wrote ìHalf-Breedî and decided to give Fred Pohl a fair chance. I did not submit it to Campbell, but gave it to Pohl directly to see what he could do with it. He tried Amazing , which rejected it. So I took it back and tried Campbell in the usual direct fashion. Campbell rejected it, too.
When Pohl became an editor, however, he announced the fact to me (on October 27, 1939) by saying that he was taking ìHalf-Breed.î In later months he also took first ìRobbie,î then ìThe Callistan Menace.î He bought seven stories from me altogether during his editorial tenure.








Half-Breed


Jefferson Scanlon wiped a perspiring brow and took a deep breath. With trembling finger, he reached for the switch-and changed his mind. His latest model, representing over three months of solid work, was very nearly his last hope. A good part of the fifteen thousand dollars he had been able to borrow was in it. And now the closing of a switch would show whether he won or lost
Scanlon cursed himself for a coward and grasped the switch firmly. He snapped it down and flicked it open again with one swift movement. And nothing happened-his eyes, strain though they might, caught no flash of surging power. The pit of his stomach froze, and he closed the switch again, savagely, and left it closed. Nothing happened: the machine, again, was a failure.
He buried his aching head in his hands, and groaned. ìOh, God! It should work-it should. My math is right and Iíve produced the fields I want. By every law of science, those fields should crack the atom.î He arose, opening the useless switch, and paced the floor in deep thought.
His theory was right. His equipment was cut neatly to the pattern of his equations. If the theory was right, the equipment must be wrong. But the equipment was right, so the theory mustÖ ìIím getting out of here before I go crazy,î he said to the four walls.
He snatched his hat and coat from the peg behind the door and was out of the house in a whirlwind of motion, slamming the door behind him in a gust of fury. ë
Atomic power. Atomic power! Atomic power!
The two words repeated themselves over and over again, singing a monotonous, maddening song in his brain. A siren song! It was luring him to destruction; for this dream he had given up a safe and comfortable professorship at M.I.T. For it, he had become a middle-aged man at thirty-the first flush of youth long gone,-an apparent failure.
And now his money was vanishing rapidly. If the love of money is the root of all evil, the need of money is most certainly the root of all despair. Scanlon smiled a little at the thought-rather neat.
Of course, there were the beautiful prospects in store if he could ever bridge the gap he had found between theory and practice. The whole world would be his-Mars too, and even the unvisited planets. All his. All he had to do was to find out what was wrong with his mathematics-no, heíd checked that, it was in the equipment. Although- He groaned aloud once more.
The gloomy train of his thoughts was broken as he suddenly became aware of a tumult of boyish shouts not far off. Scanlon frowned. He hated noise especially when he was in the dumps.
The shouts became louder and dissolved into scraps of words, ìGet him, Johnny!î ìWhee-look at him run!î
A dozen boys careened out from behind a large frame building, not two hundred yards away, and ran pell-mell in Scanlonís general direction.
In spite of himself, Scanlon regarded the yelling group curiously. They were chasing something or other, with the heartless glee of children. In the dimness he couldnít make out just what it was. He screened his eyes and squinted. A sudden motion and a lone figure disengaged itself from the crowd and ran frantically.
Scanlon almost dropped his solacing pipe in astonishment, for the fugitive was a Tweenie-an Earth-Mars half-breed. There was no mistaking that brush of wiry, dead-white hair that rose stiffly in all directions like porcupine-quills. Scanlon marvelled-what was one of those things doing outside an asylum?
The boys had caught up with the Tweenie again, and the fugitive was lost to sight. The yells increased in volume, Scanlon, shocked, saw a heavy board rise and fall with a thud. A profound sense of the enormity of his own actions in standing idly by while a helpless creature was being hounded by a crew of gamins came to him, and before he quite realized it he was charging down upon them, fists waving threateningly in the air.
ìSeat, you heathens! Get out of here before I-î the point of his foot came into violent contact with the seat of the nearest hoodlum, and his arms sent two more tumbling.
The entrance of the new force changed the situation considerably. Boys, whatever their superiority in numbers, have an instinctive fear of adults,-especially such a shouting, ferocious adult as Scanlon appeared to be. In less time than it took Scanlon to realize it they were gone, and he was left alone with the Tweenie, who lay half-prone, and who between panting sobs cast fearful and uncertain glances at his deliverer.
ìAre you hurt?î asked Scanlon gruffly.
ìNo, sir.î The Tweenie rose unsteadily, his high silver crest of hair swaying incongruously. ìI twisted my ankle a bit, but I can walk. Iíll go now. Thank you very much for helping me.î
ìHold on! Wait!î Scanlonís voice was much softer, for it dawned on him that the Tweenie, though almost full-grown, was incredibly gaunt; that his clothes were a mere mass of dirty rags; and that there was a heart-rending look of utter weariness on his thin face.
ìHere,î he said, as the Tweenie turned towards him again, ìëAre you hungry?î
The Tweenieís face twisted as though he were fighting a battle within himself. When he spoke it was in a low, embarrassed voice. ìYes-I am, a little.î
ìYou look it. Come with me to my house,î he jerked a thumb over his shoulder. ìYou ought to eat Looks like you can do with a wash and a change of clothes, too.î He turned and led the way.
He didnít speak again until he had opened his front door and entered the hall. ìI think youíd better take a bath first, boy. Thereís the bathroom. Hurry into it and lock the door before Beulah sees you.î
His admonition came too late. A sudden, startled gasp caused Scanlon to whirl about, the picture of guilt, and the Tweenie to shrink backwards into the shadow of a hat-rack.
Beulah, Seanlonís housekeeper, scurried towards them, her mild face aflame with indignation and her short, plump body exuding exasperation at every pore.
ìJefferson Scanlon! Jefferson!î She glared at the Tweenie with shocked disgust. ìHow can you bring such a thing into this house! Have you lost your sense of morals?î
The poor Tweenie was washed away with the flow of her anger, but Scanlon, after his first momentary panic, collected himself. ìCome come, Beulah. This isnít like you. Hereís a poor fellow-creature, starved, tired, beaten by a crowd of boys, and you have no pity for him. Iím really disappointed in you, Beulah.î
ìDisappointed!î sniffed the housekeeper, though touched. ìBecause of that disgraceful thing. He should be in an institution where they keep such monsters!î
ìAll right, weíll talk about it later. Go ahead, boy, take your bath. And, Beulah, see if you canít rustle up some old clothes of mine.î
With a last look of disapproval, Beulah flounced out of the room.
ìDonít mind her, boy,î Scanlon said when she left ìShe was my nurse once and she still has a sort of proprietary interest in me. She wonít harm you. Go take your bath.î
The Tweenie was a different person altogether when he finally seated himself at the dining-room table. Now that the layer of grime was removed, there was something quite handsome about his thin face, and his high, clear forehead gave him a markedly intellectual look. His hair still stood erect, a foot tall, in spite of the moistening it had received. In the light its brilliant whiteness took an imposing dignity, and to Scanlon it seemed to lose all ugliness.
ìDo you like cold chicken?î asked Scanlon.
ìOh, yes! î enthusiastically.
ìThen pitch in. And when you finish that, you can have more. Take anything on the table.î
The Tweenieís eyes glistened as he set his jaws to work; and, between the two of them, the table was bare in a few minutes.
ìWell, now,î exclaimed Scanlon when the repast had reached its end, ìI think you might answer some questions now. Whatís your name?î
ìThey called me Max.î
ìAh! And your last name?î
The Tweenie shrugged his shoulders. ìThey never called me anything but Max-when they spoke to me at all. I donít suppose a half-breed needs a name.î There was no mistaking the bitterness in his voice.
ìBut what were you doing running wild through the country? Why arenít you where you live?î
ìI was in a home. Anything is better than being in a home-even the world outside, which I had never seen. Especially after Tom died.î
ìWho was Tom, Max?î Scanlon spoke softly.
ìHe was the only other one like me. He was younger- fifteen-but he died.î He looked up from the table, fury in his eyes. ìThey killed him, Mr. Scanlon. He was such a young fellow, and so friendly. He couldnít stand being alone the way I could. He needed friends and fun, and-all he had was me. No one else would speak to him, because he was a half-breed. And when he died I couldnít stand it anymore either. I leftî
ìThey meant to be kind. Max. You shouldnít have done that Youíre not like other people; they donít understand you. And they must have done something for you. You talk as though youíve had some education.î
ìI could attend classes, all right,î he assented gloomily. ìBut I had to sit in a corner away from all the others. They let me read all I wanted, though, and Iím thankful for that.î
ìWell, there you are. Max. You werenít so badly off, were you?î
Max lifted his head and stared at the other suspiciously. ìYouíre not going to send me back, are you?î He half rose, as though ready for instant flight.
Scanlon coughed uneasily. ìOf course, if you donít want to go back I wonít make you. But it would be the best thing for you.î
ìIt wouldnít!î Max cried vehemently.
ìWell, have it your own way. Anyway, I think youíd better go to sleep now. You need it. Weíll talk in the morning.î
He led the still suspicious Tweenie up to the second floor, and pointed out a small bedroom. ìThatís yours for the night Iíll be in the next room later on, and if you need anything just shout.î He turned to leave, then thought of something. ìBut remember, you mustnít try to run away during the nightî
ìWord of honor. I wonítî
Scanlon retired thoughtfully to the room he called his study. He lit a dim lamp and seated himself in a worn armchair. For ten minutes he sat without moving, and for the first time in six years thought about something besides his dream of atomic power.
A quiet knock sounded, and at his grunted acknowledgment Beulah entered. She was frowning, her lips pursed. She planted herself firmly before him.
ìOh, Jefferson! To think that you should do this! If your dear mother knewÖî
ìSit down, Beulah,î Scanlon waved at another chair, ìand donít worry about my mother. She wouldnít have minded.î
ìNo. Your father was a good-hearted simpleton, too. Youíre just like him, Jefferson. First you spend all your money on silly machines that might blow the house up any day-and now you pick up that awful creature from the streetsÖ Tell me, Jefferson,î there was a solemn and fearful pause, ìare you thinking of keeping it?î
Scanlon smiled moodily. ìI think I am, Beulah. I canít very well do anything else.î
A week later Scanlon was in his workshop. During the night before, his brain, rested by the change in the monotony brought about by the presence of Max, had thought of a possible solution to the puzzle of why his machine wouldnít work. Perhaps some of the parts were defective, he thought. Even a very slight flaw in some of the parts could render the machine inoperative.
He plunged into work ardently. At the end of half an hour the machine lay scattered on his workbench, and Scanlon was sitting on a high stool, eying it disconsolately.
He scarcely heard the door softly open and close. It wasnít until the intruder had coughed twice that the absorbed inventor realized another was present.
ìOh-itís Max.î His abstracted gaze gave way to recognition. ìDid you want to see me?î
ìIf youíre busy I can wait, Mr. Scanlon.î The week had not removed his shyness. ìBut there were a lot of books in my roomÖî
ìBooks? Oh, Iíll have them cleaned out, if you donít want them. I donít suppose you do,-theyíre mostly textbooks, as I remember. A bit too advanced for you just now.î
ìOh, itís not too difficult,î Max assured him. He pointed to a book he was carrying. ìI just wanted you to explain a bit here in Quantum Mechanics. Thereís some math with Integral Calculus that I donít quite understand. It bothers me. Here- wait till I find it.î
He ruffled the pages, but stopped suddenly as he became aware of his surroundings. ìOh say-are you breaking up your model?î
The question brought the hard facts back to Scanlon at a bound. He smiled bitterly. ìNo, not yet. I just thought there might be something wrong with the insulation or the connections that kept it from functioning. There isnít-Iíve made a mistake somewhere.î
ìThatís too bad, Mr. Scanlon.î The Tweenieís smooth brow wrinkled mournfully.
ìThe worst of it is that I canít imagine whatís wrong. Iím positive the theoryís perfect-Iíve checked every way I can. Iíve gone over the mathematics time and time again, and each time it says the same thing. Space-distortion fields of such and such an intensity will smash the atom to smithereens. Only they donít.î
ìMay I see the equations?î
Scanlon gazed at his ward quizzically, but could see nothing in his face other than the most serious interest He shrugged his shoulders. ìThere they are-under that ream of yellow paper on the desk. I donít know if you can read them, though. Iíve been too lazy to type them out, and my handwriting is pretty bad.î
Max scrutinized them carefully and flipped the sheets one by one. ìItís a bit over my head, I guess.î
The inventor smiled a little. ìI rather thought they would be. Max.î
He looked around the littered room, and a sudden sense of anger came over him. Why wouldnít the thing work? Abruptly he got up and snatched his coat ìIím going out of here. Max,î he said. ìTell Beulah not to make me anything hot for lunch. It would be cold before I got back.î
It was afternoon when he opened the front door, and hunger was sharp enough to prevent him from realizing with a puzzled start that someone was at work in his laboratory. There came to his ears a sharp buzzing sound followed by a momentary silence and then again the buzz which this time merged into a sharp crackling that lasted an instant and was gone.
He bounded down the hall and threw open the laboratory door. The sight that met his eyes froze him into an attitude of sheer astonishment-stunned incomprehension.
Slowly, he understood the message of his senses. His precious atomic motor had been put together again, but this time in a manner so strange as to be senseless, for even his trained eye could see no reasonable relationship among the various parts.
He wondered stupidly if it were a nightmare or a practical joke, and then everything became clear to him at one bound, for there at the other end of the room was the unmistakable sight of a brush of silver hair protruding from above a bench, swaying gently from side to side as the hidden owner of the brush moved.
ìMax!î shouted the distraught inventor, in tones of fury. Evidently the foolish boy had allowed his interest to inveigle him into idle and dangerous experiments.
At the sound, Max lifted a pale face which upon the sight of his guardian turned a dull red. He approached Scanlon with reluctant steps.
ìWhat have you done?î cried Scanlon, staring about him angrily. ìDo you know what youíve been playing with? Thereís enough juice running through this thing to electrocute you twice over.î
ìIím sorry, Mr. Scanlon. I had a rather silly idea about all this when I looked over the equations, but I was afraid to say anything because you know so much more than I do. After you went away, I couldnít resist the temptation to try it out, though I didnít intend to go this far. I thought Iíd have it apart again before you came back.î
There was a silence that lasted a long time. When Scanlon spoke again, his voice was curiously mild, ìWell, what have you done?î
ìYou wonít be angry?î
ìItís a little too late for that. You couldnít have made it much worse, anyway.î
ìWell, I noticed here in your equations,î he extracted one sheet and then another and pointed, ìthat whenever the expression representing the space-distortion fields occurs, it is always referred to as a function of x* plus yí plus zî. Since the fields, as far as I could see, were always referred to as constants, that would give you the equation of a sphere.î
Scanlon nodded, ìI noticed that, but it has nothing to do with the problem.î
ìWell, I thought it might indicate the necessary arrangement of the individual fields, so I disconnected the distorters and hooked them up again in a sphere.î
The inventorís mouth fell open. The mysterious rearrangement of his device seemed clear now-and what was more, eminently sensible.
ìDoes it work?î he asked.
ìIím not quite sure. The parts havenít been made to fit this arrangement so that itís only a rough set-up at best. Then thereís the constant error-î
ìBut does it work ? Close the switch, damn it!î Scanlon was all fire and impatience once more.
ìAll right, stand back. I cut the power to one-tenth normal so we wonít get more output than we can handle.î
He closed the switch slowly, and at the moment of contact, a glowing ball of blue-white flame leaped into being from the recesses of the central quartz chamber. Scanlon screened his eyes automatically, and sought the output gauge. The needle was climbing steadily and did not stop until it was pressing the upper limit. The flame burned continuously, releasing no heat seemingly, though beside its light, more intensely brilliant than a magnesium flare, the electric lights faded into dingy yellowness.
Max opened the switch once more and the ball-of flame reddened and died, leaving the room comparatively dark and red. The output gauge sank to zero once more and Scanlon felt his knees give beneath him as he sprawled onto a chair.
He fastened his gaze on the flustered Tweenie and in that look there was respect and awe, and something more, too, for there was fear . Never before had he really realized that the Tweenie was not of Earth or Mars but a member of a race apart. He noticed the difference now, not in the comparatively minor physical changes, but in the profound and searching mental gulf that he only now comprehended.
ìAtomic power!î he croaked hoarsely. ìAnd solved by a boy, not yet twenty years old.î
Maxís confusion was painful, ìYou did all the real work, Mr. Scanlon, years and years of it. I just happened to notice a little detail that you might have caught yourself the next day.î His voice died before the fixed and steady stare of the inventor.
ìAtomic power-the greatest achievement of man so far, and we actually have it, we two.î
Both-guardian and ward-seemed awed at the grandeur and power of the thing they had created.
And in that moment-the age of Electricity died.
Jefferson Scanlon sucked at his pipe contentedly. Outside, the snow was falling and the chill of winter was in the air, but inside, in the comfortable warmth, Scanlon sat and smoked and smiled to himself. Across the way, Beulah, likewise quietly happy, hummed softly in time to clicking knitting needles, stopping only occasionally as her fingers flew through an unusually intricate portion of the pattern. In the corner next the window sat Max, occupied in his usual pastime of reading, and Scanlon reflected with faint surprise that of late Max had confined his reading to light novels.
Much had happened since that well-remembered day over a year ago. For one thing, Scanlon was now a world-famous and world-adored scientist, and it would have been strange had he not been sufficiently human to be proud of it. Secondly, and scarcely less important, atomic power was remaking the world.
Scanlon thanked all the powers that were, over and over again, for the fact that war was a thing of two centuries past, for otherwise atomic power would have been the final ruination of civilization. As it was, the coalition of World Powers that now controlled the great force of Atomic Power proved it a real blessing and were introducing it into Manís life in the slow, gradual stages necessary to prevent economic upheaval
Already, interplanetary travel had been revolutionized. From hazardous gambles, trips to Mars and Venus had become holiday jaunts to be negotiated in a third of the previous time, and trips to the outer planets were at last feasible.
Scanlon settled back further in his chair, and pondered once more upon the only fly in his wonderful pot of ointment Max had refused all credit; stormily and violently refused to have his name as much as mentioned. The injustice of it galled Scanlon, but aside from a vague mention of ìcapable assistantsî he had said nothing; and the thought of it still made him feel an ace of a cad.
A sharp explosive noise brought him out of his reverie and he turned startled eyes towards Max, who had suddenly closed his book with a peevish slap.
ìHello,î exclaimed Scanlon, ìand whatís wrong now?î
Max tossed the book aside and stood up, his underlip thrust out in a pout, ìIím lonely, thatís all.î
Scanlonís face fell, and he felt at an uncomfortable loss for words. ìI guess I know that. Max,î he said softly, at length. ìIím sorry for you, but the conditions-are so-î
Max relented, and brightening up, placed an affectionate arm about his foster-fatherís shoulder, ìI didnít mean it that way, you know. Itís just-well, I canít say it but itís that-you get to wishing you had someone your own age to talk to- someone of your own kind.î
Beulah looked up and bestowed a penetrating glance upon the young Tweenie but said nothing.
Scanlon considered, ìYouíre right, son, in a way. A friend and companion is the best thing a fellow can have, and Iím afraid Beulah and I donít qualify in that respect. One of your own kind, as you say, would be the ideal solution, but thatís a tough proposition.î He rubbed his nose with one finger and gazed at the ceiling thoughtfully.
Max opened his mouth as if he were going to say something more, but changed his mind and turned pink for no evident reason. Then he muttered, barely loud enough for Scanlon to hear, ìIím being silly!î With an abrupt turn he marched out of the room, banging the door loudly as he left.
The older man gazed after him with undisguised surprise, ìWell! What a funny way to act. Whatís got into him lately, anyway?î
Beulah halted the nimbly-leaping needles long enough to remark acidly, ìMen are born fools and blind into the bargain.î
ìIs that so?î was the somewhat nettled response, ìAnd do you know whatís biting him?î
ìI certainly do. Itís as plain as that terrible tie youíre wearing. Iíve seen it for months now. Poor fellow!î
Scanlon shook his head, ìYouíre speaking in riddles, Beulah.î
The housekeeper laid her knitting aside and glanced at the inventor wearily, ìItís very simple. The boy is twenty. He needs company.î
ìBut thatís just what he said. Is that your marvelous penetration?î
ìGood land, Jefferson. Has it been so long since you were twenty yourself? Do you mean to say that you honestly think heís referring to male company?î
ìOh,î said Scanlon, and then brightening suddenly, ìOh!î He giggled in an inane manner.
ìWell, what are you going to do about it?î
ìWhy-why, nothing. What can be done?î
ìThatís a fine way to speak of our ward, when youíre rich enough to buy five hundred orphan asylums from basement to roof and never miss the money. It should be the easiest thing in the world to find a likely-looking young lady Tweenie to keep him company.î
Scanlon gazed at her, a look of intense horror on his face, ìAre you serious, Beulah? Are you trying to suggest that I go shopping for a female Tweenie for Max? Why-why, what do I know about women-especially Tweenie women. I donít know his standards. Iím liable to pick one heíll consider an ugly hag.î
ìDonít raise silly objections, Jefferson. Outside of the hair, theyíre the same in looks as anyone else, and Iíll leave it to you to pick a pretty one. There never was a bachelor old and crabbed enough not to be able to do that .î
ìNo! I wonít do it. Of all the horrible ideas-î
ìJefferson! Youíre his guardian. You owe it to him.î
The words struck the inventor forcibly, ìI owe it to him,î he repeated. ìYouíre right there, more right than you know.î He sighed, ìI guess itís got to be done.î
Scanlon shifted uneasily from one trembling foot to the other under the piercing stare of the vinegar-faced official, whose name-board proclaimed in large letters-Miss Martin, Superintendent.
ìSit down, sir,î she said sourly. ìWhat do you wish?î
Scanlon cleared his throat. He had lost count of the asylums visited up to now and the task was rapidly becoming too much for him. He made a mental vow that this would be the last-either they would have a Tweenie of the proper sex, age, and appearance or he would throw up the whole thing as a bad job.
ìI have come to see,î he began, in a carefully-prepared, but stammered speech, ìif there are any Twee-Martian half-breeds in your asylum. It is-.î
ìWe have three,î interrupted the superintendent sharply.
ìAny females?î asked Scanlon, eagerly.
ì All females,î she replied, and her eye glittered with disapproving suspicion.
ìOh, good. Do you mind if I see them. It is-.î
Miss Martinís cold glance did not weaver, ìPardon me, but before we go any further, I would like to know whether youíre thinking of adopting a half-breed.î
ìI would like to take out guardianship papers if I am suited. Is that so very unusual?î
ìIt certainly is,î was the prompt retort. ìYou understand that in any such case, we must first make a thorough investigation of the familyís status, both financial and social. It is the opinion of the government that these creatures are better off under state supervision, and adoption would be a difficult matter.î
ìI know, madam, I know. Iíve had practical experience in this matter about fifteen months agoª I believe I can give you satisfaction as to my financial and social status without much trouble. My name is Jefferson Scanlon-.î
ìJefferson Scanlon!î her exclamation was half a scream. In a trice, her face expanded into a servile smile, ìWhy of course. I should have recognized you from the many pictures Iíve seen of you. How stupid of me. Pray do not trouble yourself with any further references. Iím sure that in your case,î this with a particularly genial expression, ìno red tape need be necessary.î
She sounded a desk-bell furiously. ìBring down Madeline and the two little ones as soon as you can,î she snapped at the frightened maid who answered. ìHave them cleaned up and warn them to be on their best behavior.î
With this, she turned to Scanlon once more, ìIt will not take long, Mr. Scanlon. It is really such a great honor to have you here with us, and I am so ashamed at my abrupt treatment of you earlier. At first I didnít recognize you, though I saw immediately that you were someone of importance.î
If Scanlon had been upset by the superintendentís former harsh haughtiness, he was entirely unnerved by her effusive geniality. He wiped his profusely-perspiring brow time and time again, answering in incoherent monosyllables the vivacious questions put to him. It was just as he had come to the wild decision of taking to his heels and escaping from the she-dragon by flight that the maid announced the three Tweenies and saved the situation.
Scanlon surveyed the three half-breeds with interest and sudden satisfaction. Two were mere children, perhaps ten years of age, but the third, some eighteen years old, was eligible from every point of view.
Her slight form was lithe and graceful even in the quiet attitude of waiting that she had assumed, and Scanlon, ìdried-up, dyed-in-the-wool bachelorî though he was, could not restrain a light nod of approval.
Her face was certainly what Beulah would call ìlikely lookingî and her eyes, now bent towards the floor in shy confusion, were of a deep blue, which seemed a great point to Scanlon.
Even her strange hair was beautiful. It was only moderately high, not nearly the size of Maxís lordly male crest, and its silky-white sheen caught the sunbeams and sent them back in glistening highlights.
The two little ones grasped the skirt of their elder companion with tight grips and regarded the two adults in wide-eyed fright which increased as time passed.
ìI believe. Miss Martin, that the young lady will do,î re-ª marked Scanlon. ìShe is exactly what I had in mind. Could you tell me how soon guardianship papers could be drawn up?î
ìI could have them ready for you tomorrow, Mr. Scanlon. In an unusual case such as yours, I could easily make special arrangements.î
ìThank you. I shall be back then-,î he was interrupted. by a loud sniffle. One of the little Tweenies could stand it no longer and had burst into tears, followed soon by the other.
ìMadeline,î cried Miss Martin to the eighteen-year-old. ìPlease keep Rose and Blanche quiet This is an abominable exhibition.î
Scanlon intervened. It seemed to him that Madeline was rather pale and though she smiled and soothed the youngsters he was certain that there were tears in her eyes.
ìPerhaps,î he suggested, ìthe young lady has no wish to leave the institution. Of course, I wouldnít think of taking her on any but a purely voluntary basis.î
Miss Martin smiled superciliously, ìShe wonít make any trouble.î She turned to the young girl, ìYouíve heard of the great Jefferson Scanlon, havenít you?î
ìYe-es, Miss Martin,í replied the girl, in a low voice.
ìLet me handle this. Miss Martin,î urged Scanlon. ëTell me, girl, would you really prefer to stay here?î
ìOh, no,î she replied earnestly, ìI would be very glad to leave, though,î with an apprehensive glance at Miss Martin, ìI have been very well treated here. But you see-whatís to be done with the two little ones? Iím all they have, and if I left, they-they-î
She broke down and snatched them to her with a sudden, fierce grip, ìI donít want to leave them, sir!î She kissed each softly, ìDonít cry, children. I wonít leave you. They wonít take me away.î
Scanlon swallowed with difficulty and groped for a handkerchief with which to blow his nose. Miss Martin gazed on with disapproving hauteur.
ìDonít mind the silly thing, Mr. Scanlon,î said she. ìI believe I can have everything ready by tomorrow noon.î
ìHave ready guardianship papers for all three,î was the gruff reply.
ìWhat? All three? Are you serious?î
ìCertainly. I can do it if I wish, canít I?î he shouted.
ìWhy, of course, but-î
Scanlon left precipitately, leaving both Madeline and Miss Martin petrified, the latter with utter stupefaction, the former in a sudden upsurge of happiness. Even the ten-year-olds sensed the change in affairs and subsided into occasional sobs.
Beulahís surprise, when she met them at the airport and saw three Tweenies where she had expected one, is not to be described. But, on the whole, the surprise was a pleasant one, for little Rose and Blanche took to the elderly housekeeper immediately. Their first greeting was to bestow great, moist kisses upon Beulahís lined cheeks at which she glowed with joy and kissed them in turn.
With Madeline she was enchanted, whispering to Scanlon that he knew a little more about such matters than he pretended.
ìIf she had decent hair,î whispered Scanlon in reply, ìIíd marry her myself. That I would,î and he smiled in great selfï satisfaction.
The arrival at home in mid-afternoon was the occasion of great excitement on the part of the two oldsters. Scanlon inveigled Max into accompanying him on a long walk together in the woods, and when the unsuspecting Max left, puzzled but willing, Beulah busied herself with setting the three newcomers at their ease.
They were shown over the house from top to bottom, the rooms assigned to them being indicated. Beulah prattled away continuously, joking and chaffing, until the Tweenies had lost all their shyness and felt as if they had known her forever.
Then, as the winter evening approached, she turned to Madeline rather abruptly and said, ìItís getting late. Do you want to come downstairs with me and help prepare supper for the men?î
Madeline was taken aback, ìThe men. Is there, then, someone besides Mr. Scanlon?î
ìOh, yes. Thereís Max. You havenít seen him yet,î
ìIs Max a relation of yours?î
ìNo, child. Heís another of Mr. Scanlonís wards.î
ìOh, I see.î She blushed and her hand rose involuntarily to her hair.
Beulah saw in a moment the thoughts passing through her head and added in a softer voice, ìDonít worry, dear. He wonít mind your being a Tweenie. Heíll be glad to see you.î
It turned out, though, that ìgladî was an entirely inadequate adjective when applied to Maxís emotions at the first sight of Madeline.
He tramped into the house in advance of Scanlon, taking off his overcoat and stamping the snow off his shoes as he did so.
ìOh, boy,î he cried at the half-frozen inventor who followed him in, ìwhy you were so anxious to saunter about on a freezer like today I donít know.î He sniffed the air appreciatively, ìAh, do I smell lamb chops?î and he made for the dining-room in double-quick time.
It was at the threshold that he stopped suddenly, and gasped for air as if in the last throes of suffocation. Scanlon dipped by and sat down.
ìCome on,î he said, enjoying the otherís brick-red visage. ëSit down. We have company today. This is Madeline and this s Rose and this is Blanche. And this,î he turned to the seated girls and noted with satisfaction that Madelineís pink face was burning a fixed glance of confusion upon the plate before her, ìis my ward. Max.î
ìHow do you do,î murmured Max, eyes like saucers, ìIím pleased to meet you.î
Rose and Blanche shouted cheery greetings in reply but Madeline only raised her eyes fleetingly and then dropped them again.
The meal was a singularly quiet one. Max, though he had complained of a ravenous hunger all afternoon, allowed his chop and mashed potatoes to die of cold before him, while Madeline played with her food as if she did not know what it was there for. Scanlon and Beulah ate quietly and well, exchanging sly glances between bites.
Scanlon sneaked off after dinner, for he rightly felt that the more tactful touch of a woman was needed in these matters, and when Beulah joined him in his study some hours later, he saw at a glance that he had been correct.
ìIíve broken the ice,î she said happily, ìtheyíre telling each other their life histories now and are getting along wonderfully. Theyíre still afraid of each other, though, and insist on sitting at opposite ends of the room, but thatíll wear off-and pretty quickly, too.î
ìItís a fine match, Beulah, eh?î
ìA finer one Iíve never seen. And little Rose and Blanche are angels. Iíve just put them to bed.î
There was a short silence, and then Beulah continued softly, ìThat was the only time you were right and I was wrong- that time you first brought Max into the house and I objected -but that one time makes up for everything else. You are a credit to your dear mother, Jefferson.î
Scanlon nodded soberly, ìI wish I could make all Tweenies on earth so happy. It would be such a simple thing. If we treated them like humans instead of like criminals and gave them homes built especially for them and calculated especially for their happiness-î
ìWell, why donít you do it?î interrupted Beulah.
Scanlon turned a serious eye upon the old housekeeper, ìThatís exactly what I was leading up to.î His voice lapsed into a dreamy murmur, ìJust think. A town of Tweenies-run by them and for them-with its own governing officials and its own schools and its own public utilities. A little world within a world where the Tweenie can consider himself a human being-instead of a freak surrounded and looked down upon by endless multitudes of pure-bloods.î
He reached for his pipe and filled it slowly, ìThe world owes a debt to one Tweenie which it can never repay-and I owe it to him as well. Iím going to do it. Iím going to create Tweenietown.î
That night he did not go to sleep. The stars turned in their grand circles and paled at last. The grey of dawn came and grew, but still Scanlon sat unmoving-dreaming and planning.
At eighty, age sat lightly upon Jefferson Scanlonís head. The spring was gone from his step, the sturdy straightness from his shoulders, but his robust health had not failed him, and his mind, beneath the shock of hair, now as white as any Tweenieís, still worked with undiminished vigor.
A happy life is not an aging one, and for forty years now, Scanlon had watched Tweenietown grow, and in the watching, had found happiness.
He could see it now stretched before him like a large, beautiful painting as he gazed out the window. A little gem of a town with a population of slightly more than a thousand, nestling amid three hundred square miles of fertile Ohio land.
Neat and sturdy houses, wide, clean streets, parks, theatres, schools, stores-a model town, bespeaking decades of intelligent effort and co-operation.
The door opened behind him and he recognized the soft step without needing to turn, ìIs that you, Madeline?î
ìYes, father,î for by no other title was he known to any inhabitant of Tweenietown. ìMax is returning with Mr. Johanson.î
ìThatís good,î he gazed at Madeline tenderly. ìWeíve seen Tweenietown grow since those days long ago, havenít we?î
Madeline nodded and sighed.
ìDonít sigh, dear. Itís been well worth the years weíve given to it. If only Beulah had lived to see it now.î
He shook his head as he thought of the old housekeeper, dead now a quarter of a century.
ìDonít think such sad thoughts,î admonished Madeline in her turn. ìHere comes Mr. Johanson. Remember itís the fortieth anniversary and a happy day; not a sad one.î
Charles B. Johanson was what is known as a ìshrewdî man. That is, he was an intelligent, far-seeing person, comparatively well-versed in the sciences, but one who was wont to put these good qualities into practice only in order to advance his own interest. Consequently, he went far in politics and was the first appointee to the newly created Cabinet post of Science and Technology.
It was the first official act of his to visit the worldís greatest scientist and inventor, Jefferson Scanlon, who, in his old age, still had no peer in the number of useful inventions turned over to the government every year. Tweenietown was a considerable surprise to him. It was known rather vaguely in the outside world that the town existed, and it was considered a hobby of the old scientist-a harmless eccentricity. Johanson found it a well-worked-out project of sinister connotations.
His attitude, however, when he entered Scanlonís room in company with his erstwhile guide. Max, was one of frank geniality, concealing well certain thoughts that swept through his mind.
ìAh, Johanson,î greeted Scanlon, ìyouíre back. What do you think of all this?î his arm made a wide sweep.
ìIt is surprising-something marvelous to behold,î Johanson assured him.
Scanlon chuckled, ìGlad to hear it. We have a population of 1154 now and growing every day. Youíve seen what weíve done already but itís nothing to what we are going to do in the future-even after my death. However, there is something I wish to see done before I die and for that Iíll need your help.
ìAnd that is?î questioned the Secretary of Science and Technology guardedly.
ìJust this. That you sponsor measures giving these Tweenies, these so long despised half-breeds, full equality,-political,- legal,-economic,-social,-with Terrestrials and Martians.î
Johanson hesitated, ìIt would be difficult. There is a certain amount of perhaps understandable prejudice against them, and until we can convince Earth that the Tweenies deserve equality-î he shook his head doubtfully.
ìDeserve equality!î exclaimed Scanlon, vehemently, ìWhy, they deserve more. I am moderate in my demands.î At these words. Max, sitting quietly in a corner, looked up and bit his lip, but said nothing as Scanlon continued, ìYou donít know the true worth of these Tweenies. They combine the best of Earth and Mars. They possess the cold, analytical reasoning powers of the Martians together with the emotional drive and boundless energy of the Earthman. As far as intellect is concerned, they are your superior and mine, every one of them. I ask only equality.î
The Secretary smiled soothingly, ìYour zeal misleads you perhaps, my dear Scanlon.î
ìIt does not. Why do you suppose I turn out so many successful gadgets-like this gravitational shield I created a few years back. Do you think I could have done it without my Tweenie assistants? It was Max here,î Max dropped his eyes before the sudden piercing gaze of the Cabinet member, ìthat put the final touch upon my discovery of atomic power itself.î
Scanlon threw caution to the winds, as he grew excited, ìAsk Professor Whitsun of Stanford and heíll tell you. Heís a world authority on psychology and knows what heís talking about. He studied the Tweenie and heíll tell you that the Tweenie is the coming race of the Solar System, destined to take the supremacy away from us pure-bloods as inevitably as night follows day. Donít you think they deserve equality in that case?î
ìYes, I do think so,-definitely,î replied Johanson. There was a strange glitter in his eyes, and a crooked smile upon his Ups, ìThis is of extreme importance, Scanlon. I shall attend to it immediately. So immediately, in fact, that I believe I had better leave in half an hour, to catch the 2:10 strato-car.î
Johanson had scarcely left, when Max approached Scanlon and blurted out with no preamble at all, ìThere is something I have to show you, father-something you have not known about before.î
Scanlon stared his surprise, ìWhat do you mean?î
ìCome with me, please, father. I shall explain.î His grave expression was almost frightening. Madeline joined the two at the door, and at a sign from Max, seemed to comprehend the situation. She said nothing but her eyes grew sad and the lines in her forehead seemed to deepen.
In utter silence, the three entered the waiting Rocko-car and were sped across the town in the direction of the Hill oí the Woods. High over Lake Clare they shot to come down once more in the wooded patch at the foot of the hill.
A tall, burly Tweenie sprang to attention as the car landed, and started at the sight of Scanlon.
ìGood afternoon, father,î he whispered respectfully, and cast a questioning glance at Max as he did so.
ìSame to you, Emmanuel,î replied Scanlon absently. He suddenly became aware that before him was a cleverly-camouflaged opening that led into the very hill itself.
Max beckoned him to follow and led the way into the opening which after a hundred feet opened into an enormous manmade cavern. Scanlon halted in utter amazement, for before him were three giant space-ships, gleaming silvery-white and equipped, as he could plainly see, with the latest atomic power.
ìIím sorry, father,î said Max, ìthat all this was done without your knowledge. It is the only case of the sort in the history of Tweenietown.î Scanlon scarcely seemed to hear, standing as if in a daze, and Max continued, ìThe center one is the flagship-the Jefferson Scanlon . The one to the right is the Beulah Goodkin and the one to the left the Madeline .î
Scanlon snapped out of his bemusement, ìBut what does this all mean and why the secrecy?î
ìThese ships have been lying ready for five years now, fully fuelled and provisioned, ready for instant take-off. Tonight. we blast away the side of the hill and shoot for Venus -tonight. We have not told you till now, for we did not wish to disturb your peace of mind with a misfortune we knew long ago to be inevitable. We had thought that perhaps,î his voice sank lower, ìits fulfillment might have been postponed until after you were no longer with us.î
ìSpeak out,î cried Scanlon suddenly. ìI want the full details. Why do you leave just as I feel sure I can obtain full equality for you?î
ìExactly,î answered Max, mournfully. ìYour words to Johanson swung the scale. As long as Earthmen and Martians merely thought us different and inferior, they despised us and tolerated us. You have told Johanson we were superior and would ultimately supplant Mankind. They have no alternative now but to hate us. There shall be no further toleration; of that I can assure you. We leave before the storm breaks.î
The old manís eyes widened as the truth of the otherís statements became apparent to him, ìI see. I must get in touch with Johanson. Perhaps, we can together correct that terrible mistake.î He clapped a hand to his forehead.
ìOh, Max,î interposed Madeline, tearfully, ìwhy donít you come to the point? We want you to come with us, father. In Venus, which is so sparsely settled, we can find a spot where we can develop unharmed for an unlimited time. We can establish our nation, free and untrammeled, powerful in our own right, no longer dependent on-î
Her voice died away and she gazed anxiously at Scanlonís face, now grown drawn and haggard. ìNo,î he whispered, ìno! My place is here with my own kind. Go, my children, and establish your nation. In the end, your descendants shall rule the System. But I-I shall stay here.î
ìThen I shall stay, too,î insisted Max. ìYou are old and someone must care for you. I owe you my life a dozen times over.î
Scanlon shook his head firmly, ìI shall need no one. Dayton is not far. I shall be well taken care of there or anywhere else I go. You, Max, are needed by your race. You are their leader. Go!î
Scanlon wandered through the deserted streets of Tweenietown and tried to take a grip upon himself. It was hard. Yesterday, he had celebrated the fortieth anniversary of its founding-it had been at the peak of its prosperity. Today, it was a ghost town.
Yet, oddly enough, there was a spirit of exultation about him. His dream had shattered-but only to give way to a brighter dream. He had nourished foundlings and brought up a race in its youth and for that he was someday to be recognized as the founder of the superrace .
It was his creation that would someday rule the system. Atomic power-gravity nullifiers-all faded into insignificance. This was his real gift to the Universe.
This, he decided, was how a God must feel.



***



As in ìThe Weapon Too Dreadful to Use,î the story dealt with racial prejudice on an interplanetary scale. I kept coming back to this theme very frequently-something not surprising in a Jew growing up during the Hitler era.
Once again my naivete shows, since I assume not only an intelligent race on Mars, where such a thing is most unlikely even by 1939 evidence, but assume the Martians to be sufficiently like Earthmen to make interbreeding possible. (I can only shake my head wearily. I knew better in 1939;
I really did. I just accepted science fictional cliches, thatís all. Eventually, I stopped doing that.)
My treatment of atomic power was also primitive in the extreme, and I knew better than that, too, even though at the time I wrote the story, uranium fission had not been discovered. The Tweenieís mysterious reference to ìa function of x2plus y2plus z2î merely means that I had taken analytic geometry at Columbia not long before and was flaunting my knowledge of the equation for the sphere.
This was the first story in which I tried to introduce the romantic motif, however light. It had to be a failure. At the time of the writing of this story, I had still never had a date with a girl.
And yet the greatest embarrassment in a story simply littered with embarrassments was the following line in the seventh paragraph: ìÖ For it, he had become a middle-aged man at thirty-the first flush of youth long gone-î
Well, I wrote it at nineteen. To me, the first flush of youth was long gone by the time one reached thirty. I know better now, of course, since more than thirty years later, I find that I am still in the first flush of youth.
There was some reason for self-congratulation in connection with ìHalf-Breed,î however. My fourth published story, it was the longest to appear up to then. With a length of nine thousand words, it was listed on the table of contents as a ìnovelette,î my first published story in that class.
My name also appeared on the cover of the magazine. It was the first time that had ever happened.
Almost immediately after finishing ìHalf-Breed,î I began ìThe Secret Sense,î submitting it to John Campbell on June 21, 1939, and receiving it back on the twenty-eighth. Pohl could not place it either.
Toward the end of 1940, however, a pair of sister magazines, Cosmic Stories and Stirring Science Stories , were being planned, with Don Wollheim, a fellow Futurian, selected as editor. The magazines were starting on a microbudget, however, and the only way they could come into being was to get stories for nothing-at least for the initial issues. For the purpose, Wollheim appealed to the Futurians and they came through. The first issues consisted entirely (I think) of stories by Futurians, under their own names or pseudonyms.
I, too, was asked, and since by that time I was convinced I could sell ìThe Secret Senseî nowhere, I donated it to Wollheim, who promptly accepted it.
That was that, except that, at the time, yet another magazine, Comet Stories , was coming into existence, under the editorship of F. Orlin Tremaine, who had been Campbellís predecessor at Astounding .
I went to see Tremaine several times, since I thought I might sell him a story or two. On the second visit, on December 5, 1940, Tremaine spoke with some heat concerning the forthcoming birth of Wollheimís magazines. While he himself was paying top rates, he said, Wollheim was getting stories for nothing and with these could put out magazines that would siphon readership from those magazines that paid. Any author who donated stories to Wollheim, and thus contributed to the destruction of competing magazines who paid, should be blacklisted in the field.
I listened with horror, knowing that I had donated a story for nothing. It was a story, to be sure, that I had felt to be worth nothing, but it had not occurred to me that I was undercutting other authors by setting up unfair competition.
I did not quite have the nerve to tell Tremaine I was one of the guilty ones, but as soon as I got home I wrote to Wollheim asking him to accept one of two alternatives: either he could run the story under a pseudonym so that my guilt would be hidden, or if he insisted on using my name he could pay me five dollars so that if the question ever arose I could honestly deny having given him the story for nothing.
Wollheim chose to use my name and sent me a check for five dollars, but did so with remarkably poor grace (and, to be sure, he was not, in those days, noted for any suavity of character). He accompanied the check with an angry letter that said, in part, that I was being paid an enormous word rate because it was only my name that had value and for that I was receiving $2.50 a word. Perhaps he was correct. If so, the word rate was indeed a record, one that I have not surpassed to this very day. On the other hand, the total payment also set a record. No other story I have written commanded so low a payment.
Years later, the well-known science fiction historian Sam Moskowitz wrote a short biography of me, which appeared in the April 1962 Amazing . In the course of the biography, he describes a version of the above events and mistakenly states that it was John Campbell who was angry at the donation of stories without pay and that it was he who threatened me with blacklisting.








Not so!


Campbell had nothing to do with it, and, whatís more, would have been incapable of making threats. If he had known in advance that I intended to donate a story for nothing to a competing magazine, he would have pointed out my stupidity to me in a perfectly friendly way and would have let it go at that.
As a matter of fact, while I tried to keep my guilt a secret from Tremaine, I had no intention of hiding it from Campbell. On my very next visit to him, on December 16, 1940, I confessed in full, and he shrugged it off.
ìCampbell, I imagine, was quite certain that no magazine that had to depend on free stories could last for long, since the only stories so available would have been rejected by everyone else. And he would be right. Cosmic Stories lasted only three issues, and Stirring Science Stories only four. ìThe Secret Senseî remained the only story of mine they published.
As for Comet Stories , that lasted five issues, and though Tremaine hesitated over a couple of my stories, he never bought one.
The Secret Sense
The lilting strains of a Strauss waltz filled the room. The music waxed and waned beneath the sensitive fingers of Lincoln Fields, and through half-closed eyes he could almost see whirling figures pirouetting about the waxed floor of some luxurious salon.
Music always affected him that way. It filled his mind with dreams of sheer beauty and transformed his room into a paradise of sound. His hands flickered over the piano in the last delicious combinations of tones and then slowed reluctantly to a halt.
He sighed and for a moment remained absolutely silent as if trying to extract the last essence of beauty from the dying echoes. Then he turned and smiled faintly at the other occupant of the room.
Garth Jan smiled in turn but said nothing. Garth had a great liking for Lincoln Fields, though little understanding. They were worlds apart-literally-for Garth hailed from the giant underground cities of Mars while Fields was the product of sprawling Terrestrial New York.
ìHow was that. Garth, old fellow?î questioned Fields doubtfully.
Garth shook his head. He spoke in his precise, painstaking manner, ìI listened attentively and can truly say that it was not unpleasant. There is a certain rhythm, a cadence of sorts, which, indeed, is rather soothing. But beautiful? No!î
There was pity in Fieldsí eyes-pity almost painful in its intensity. The Martian met the gaze and understood all that it meant, yet there was no answering spark of envy. His bony giant figure remained doubled up in a chair that was too small for him and one thin leg swung leisurely back and forth.
Fields lunged out of his seat impetuously and grasped his companion by the arm. ìHere! Seat yourself on the bench.î
Garth obeyed genially. ìI see you want to carry out some little experiment.î
ìYouíve guessed it. Iíve read scientific works which tried to explain all about the difference in sense-equipment between Earthman and Martian, but I never could quite grasp it all.î
He tapped the notes C and F in a single octave and glanced at the Martian inquiringly.
ìIf thereís a difference,î said Garth doubtfully, ìitís a very slight one. If I were listening casually, I would certainly say you had hit the same note twice.î
The Earthman marvelled. ìHowís this?î He tapped C and G.
ìI can hear the difference this time.î
ìWell, I suppose all they say about your people is true. You poor fellows-to have such a crude sense of bearing. You donít know what youíre missing.î
The Martian shrugged his shoulders fatalistically. ìOne misses nothing that one has never possessed.î
Garth Jan broke the short silence that followed. ìDo you realize that this period of history is the first in which two intelligent races have been able to communicate with each other? The comparison of sense equipment is highly interesting-and rather broadens oneís views on life.î
ìThatís right,î agreed the Earthman, ìthough we seem to have all the advantage of the comparison. You know a Terrestrial biologist stated last month that he was amazed that a race so poorly equipped in the matter of sense-perception could develop so high a civilization as yours.î
ìAll is relative, Lincoln. What we have is sufficient for us.î
Fields felt a growing frustration within him. ìBut if you only knew, Garth, if you only knew what you were missing.
ìYouíve never seen the beauties of a sunset or of dancing fields of flowers. You canít admire the blue of the sky, the green of the grass, the yellow of ripe corn. To you the world consists of shades of dark and light.î He shuddered at the thought ìYou canít smell a flower or appreciate its delicate perfume. You canít even enjoy such a simple thing as a good, hearty meal. You canít taste nor smell nor see color. I pity you for your drab world.î
ìWhat you say is meaningless, Lincoln. Waste no pity on me, for I am as happy as you.î He rose and reached for his cane-necessary in the greater gravitational field of Earth.
ìYou must not judge us with such easy superiority, you know.î That seemed to be the galling aspect of the matter. ìWe do not boast of certain accomplishments of our race of which you know nothing.î
And then, as if heartily regretting his words, a wry grimace overspread his face, and he started for the door.
Fields sat puzzled and thoughtful for a moment, then jumped up and ran after the Martian, who was stumping his way towards the exit. He gripped Garth by the shoulder and insisted that he return.
ìWhat did you mean by that last remark?î
The Martian turned his face away as if unable to face his questioner. ìForget it, Lincoln. That was just a moment of indiscretion when your unsolicited pity got on my nerves.î
Fields gave him a sharp glance. ìItís true, isnít it? Itís logical that Martians possess senses Earthmen do not, but it passes the bounds of reason that your people should want to keep it secret.î
ìThat is as it may be. But now that youíve found me out through my own utter stupidity, you will perhaps agree to let it go no further?î
ìOf course! Iíll be as secret as the grave, though Iím darned if I can make anything of it. Tell me, of what nature is this secret sense of yours?î
Garth Jan shrugged listlessly. ìHow can I explain? Can you define color to me, who cannot even conceive it?î
ìIím not asking for a definition. Tell me its uses. Please,î he gripped the otherís shoulder, ìyou might as well. I have given my promise of secrecy.î
The Martian sighed heavily. ìIt wonít do you much good. Would it satisfy you to know that if you were to show me two containers, each filled with a clear liquid, I could tell you at once whether either of the two were poisonous? Or, if you were to show me a copper wire, I could tell instantly whether an electric current were passing through it, even if it were as little as a thousandth of an ampere? Or I could tell you the temperature of any substance within three degrees of the true value even if you held it as much as five yards away? Or I could-well, Iíve said enough.î
ìIs that all?î demanded Fields, with a disappointed cry.
ìWhat more do you wish?î
ìAll youíve described is very useful-but where is the beauty in it? Has this strange sense of yours no value to the spirit as well as to the body?î
Garth Jan made an impatient movement. ìReally, Lincoln, you talk foolishly. I have given you only that for which you asked-the uses I put this sense to. I certainly didnít attempt to explain its nature. Take your color sense. As far as I can see its only use is in making certain fine distinctions which I cannot. You can identify certain chemical solutions, for instance, by something you call color when I would be forced to run a chemical analysis. Whereís the beauty in that?î
Fields opened his mouth to speak but the Martian motioned him testily into silence. ìI know. Youíre going to babble foolishness about sunsets or something. But what do you know of beauty? Have you ever known what it was to witness the beauty of the naked copper wires when an AC current is turned on? Have you sensed the delicate loveliness of induced currents set up in a solenoid when a magnet is passed through it? Have you ever attended a Martian portwem ?î
Garth Janís eyes had grown misty with the thoughts he was conjuring up, and Fields stared in utter amazement. The shoe was on the other foot now and his sense of superiority left him of a sudden.
ìEvery race has its own attributes,î he mumbled with a fatalism that had just a trace of hypocrisy in it, ìbut I ësee no reason why you should keep it such a blasted secret. We Earthmen have kept no secrets from your race.î
ìDonít accuse us of ingratitude,î cried Garth Jan vehemently. According to the Martian code of ethics, ingratitude was the supreme vice, and at the insinuation of that Garthís caution left him. ìWe never act without reason, we Martians. And certainly it is not for our own sake that we hide this magnificent ability.î
The Earthman smiled mockingly. He was on the trail of something-he felt it in his bones-and the only way to get it out was to tease it out.
ìNo doubt there is some nobility behind it all. It is a strange attribute of your race that you can always find some altruistic motive for your actions.î
Garth Jan bit his lip angrily. ìYou have no right to say that.î For a moment he thought of pleading worry over Fieldsí future peace of mind as a reason for silence, but the latterís mocking reference to ìaltruismî had rendered that impossible. A feeling of anger crept over him gradually and that forced him to his decision.
There was no mistaking the note of frigid unfriendliness that entered his voice. ìIíll explain by analogy.î The Martian stared straight ahead of him as he spoke, eyes half-closed.
ìYou have told me that I live in a world that is composed merely of shades of light and dark. You try to describe a world of your own composed of infinite variety and beauty. I listen but care little concerning it. I have never known it and never can know it. One does not weep over the loss of what one has never owned.
ì But -what if you were able to give me the ability to see color for five minutes? What if, for five minutes, I reveled in wonders undreamed of? What if, after those five minutes, I have to return it forever ? Would those five minutes of paradise be worth a lifetime of regret afterwards-a lifetime of dissatisfaction because of my own shortcomings? Would it not have been the kinder act never to have told me of color in the first place and so have removed its ever-present temptation?î
Fields had risen to his feet during the last part of the Martianís speech and his eyes opened wide in a wild surmise. ìDo you mean an Earthman could possess the Martian sense if so desired?î
ìFor five minutes in a lifetime,î Garth Janís eyes grew dreamy, ìand in those five minutes sense-î
He came to a confused halt and glared angrily at his companion, ìYou know more than is good for you. See that you donít forget your promise.î
He rose hastily and hobbled away as quickly as he could, leaning heavily upon the cane. Lincoln Fields made no move to stop him. He merely sat there and thought.
The great height of the cavern shrouded the roof in misty obscurity in which, at fixed intervals, there floated luminescent globes of radite. The air, heated by this subterranean volcanic stratum, wafted past gently. Before Lincoln Fields stretched the wide, paved avenue of the principal city of Mars, fading away into the distance.
He clumped awkwardly up to the entrance of the home of Garth Jan, the six-inch-thick layer of lead attached to each shoe a nuisance unending. Though it was still better than the uncontrollable bounding Earth muscles brought about in this lighter gravity.
The Martian was surprised to see his friend of six months ago but not altogether joyful. Fields was not slow to notice this but he merely smiled to himself. The opening formalities passed, the conventional remarks were made, and the two seated themselves.
Fields crushed the cigarette in the ash-tray and sat upright suddenly serious. ìIíve come to ask for those five minutes you claim you can give me! May I have them?î
ìIs that a rhetorical question? It certainly doesnít seem to require an answer.î Garthís tone was openly contemptuous.
The Earthman considered the other thoughtfully. ìDo you mind if I outline my position in a few words?î
The Martin smiled indifferently. ìIt wonít make any difference,î he said.
ìIíll take my chance on that. The situation is this: Iíve been bom and reared in the lap of luxury and have been most disgustingly spoiled. Iíve never yet had a reasonable desire that I have not been able to fulfill, and I donít know what it means not to get what I want. Do you see?î
There was no answer and he continued, ìI have found my happiness in beautiful sights, beautiful words, and beautiful sounds. I have made a cult of beauty. In a word, I am an aesthete.î
ìMost interesting,î the Martianís stony expression did not change a whit, ìbut what bearing has all this on the problem at hand?î
ìJust this: You speak of a new form of beauty-a form unknown to me at present and entirely inconceivable even, but one which could be known if you so wished. The notion attracts me. It more than attracts me-it makes its demands of me. Again I remind you that when a notion begins to make demands of me, I yield-I always have.î
ìYou are not the master in this case,î reminded Garth Jan. ìIt is crude of me to remind you of this, but you cannot force me , you know. Your words, in fact, are almost offensive in their implications.î
ìI am glad you said that, for it allows me to be crude in my turn without offending my conscience.î
Garth Janís only reply to this was a self-confident grimace.
ìI make my demand of you,î said Fields, slowly, ìin the name of gratitude.î
ìGratitude?î the Martian started violently.
Fields grinned broadly, ìItís an appeal no honorable Martian can refuse-by your own ethics. You owe me gratitude, now, because it was through me you gained entrance into the houses of the greatest and most honorable men of Earth.î
ìI know that,î Garth Jan flushed angrily. ìYou are impolite to remind me of it.î
ìI have no choice. You acknowledged the gratitude you owe me in actual words, back on Earth. I demand the chance to possess this mysterious sense you keep so secret-in the name of this acknowledged gratitude. Can you refuse now?î
ìYou know I canít,î was the gloomy response. ìI hesitated only for your own sake.î
The Martian rose and held out his hand gravely, ìYou have me by the neck, Lincoln. It is done. Afterwards, though, I owe you nothing more. This will pay my debt of gratitude. Agreed?î
ìAgreed!î The two shook hands and Lincoln Fields continued in an entirely different tone. ìWeíre still friends, though, arenít we? This little altercation wonít spoil things?î
ìI hope not. Come! Join me at the evening meal and we can discuss the time and place of your-er-five minutes.î
Lincoln Fields tried hard to down the faint nervousness that filled him as he waited in Garth Janís private ìconcertî-room. He felt a sudden desire to laugh as the thought came to him that he felt exactly as he usually did in a dentistís waiting room.
He lit his tenth cigarette, puffed twice and threw it away, ìYouíre doing this very elaborately, Garth.î
The Martian shrugged, ìYou have only five minutes so I might as well see to it that they are put to the best possible use. Youíre going to ëhearí part of a portwem , which is to our sense what a great symphony (is that the word?) is to sound.î
ìHave we much longer to wait? The suspense, to be trite, is terrible.î
ìWeíre waiting for Novi Lon, who is to play the portwem , and for Done Vol. my private physician. Theyíll be along soon.î
Fields wandered onto the low dais that occupied the center of the room and regarded the intricate mechanism thereupon with curious interest. The fore-part was encased in gleaming aluminum leaving exposed only seven tiers of shining black knobs above and five large white pedals below. Behind, however, it lay open, and within there ran crossings and recrossings of finer wires in incredibly complicated paths.
ìA curious thing, this,î remarked the Earthman.
The Martian joined him on the dais, ìItís an expensive instrument. It cost me ten thousand Martian credits.î
ìHow does it work?î
ìNot so differently from a Terrestrial piano. Each of the upper knobs controls a different electric circuit. Singly and together an expert portwem player could, by manipulating the knobs, form any conceivable pattern of electric current. The pedals below control the strength of the current.î
Fields nodded absently and ran his fingers over the knobs at random. Idly, he noticed the small galvanometer located just above the keys kick violently each time he depressed a knob. Aside from that, he sensed nothing.
ìIs the instrument really playing?î
The Martian smiled, ìYes, it is. And a set of unbelievably atrocious discords too.î
He took a seat before the instrument and with a murmured ìHereís howlî his fingers skimmed rapidly and accurately over the gleaming buttons.
The sound of a reedy Martian voice crying out in strident accents broke in upon him, and Garth Jan ceased in sudden embarrassment. ìThis is Novi Lon,î he said hastily to Fields, ìAs usual, he does not like my playing.î
Fields rose to meet the newcomer. He was bent of shoulder and evidently of great age. A fine tracing of wrinkles, especially about eyes and mouth, covered his face.
ìSo this is the young Earthman,î he cried, in strongly-accented English. ìI disapprove your rashness but sympathize with your desire to attend a portwem . It is a great pity you can own our sense for no more than five minutes. Without it no one can truly be said to live.î
Garth Jan laughed, ìHe exaggerates, Lincoln. Heís one of the greatest musicians of Mars, and thinks anyone doomed to damnation who would not rather attend a portwem than breathe.î He hugged the older man warmly, ìHe was my teacher in my youth and many were the long hours in which he struggled to teach me the proper combination of circuits.î
ìAnd I have failed after all, you dunce,î snapped the old Martian. ìI heard your attempt at playing as I entered. You still have not learned the proper fortgass combination. You were desecrating the soul of the great Bar Damn. My pupil! Bah! It is a disgrace!î
The entrance of the third Martian, Done Vol, prevented Novi Lon from continuing his tirade. Garth, glad of the reprieve, approached the physician hastily.
ìIs all ready?î
ìYes,î growled Vol surlily, ìand a particularly uninteresting experiment this will be. We know all the results beforehand.î His eyes fell upon the Earthman, whom he eyed contemptuously. ìIs this the one who wishes to be inoculated?î
Lincoln Fields nodded eagerly and felt his throat and mouth go dry suddenly. He eyed the newcomer uncertainly and felt uneasy at the sight of a tiny bottle of clear liquid and a hypodermic which the physician had extracted from a case he was carrying.
ìWhat are you going to do?î he demanded.
ìHeíll merely inoculate you. Itíll take a second,î Garth Jan assured him. ìYou see, the sense-organs in this case are several groups of cells in the cortex of the brain. They are activated by a hormone, a synthetic preparation of which is used to stimulate the dormant cells of the occasional Martian who is born-er-íblind.í Youíll receive the same treatment.î
ìOh!-then Earthmen possess those cortex cells?î
ìIn a very rudimentary state. The concentrated hormone will activate them, but only for five minutes. After that time, they are literally blown out as a result of their unwonted activity. After that, they canít be re-activated under any circumstances.î
Done Vol completed his last-minute preparations and approached Fields. Without a word. Fields extended his right arm and the hypodermic plunged in.
With the operation completed, the Terrestrial waited a moment or two and then essayed a shaky laugh, ìI donít feel any change.î
ìYou wonít for about ten minutes,î explained Garth. -îIt takes time. Just sit back and relax. Novi Lon has begun Bar Damnís ëCanals in the Desertí-it is my favorite-and when the hormone begins its work you will find yourself in the middle of things.î
Now that the die was cast irrevocably. Fields found himself stonily calm. Novi Lon played furiously, and Garth Jan, at the Earthmanís right, was already lost in the composition. Even Done Vol, the fussy doctor, had forgotten his peevishness for the nonce.
Fields snickered under his breath. The Martians listened attentively but to him the room was devoid of sound and- almost-of all other sensation as well. What-no, it was impossible, of course-but what if it were just an elaborate practical joke? He stirred uneasily and put the thought from his mind angrily.
The minutes passed; Novi Lonís fingers flew; Garth Janís expression was one of unfeigned delight.
Then Lincoln Fields blinked his eyes rapidly. For a moment a nimbus of color seemed to surround the musician and his instrument. He couldnít identify it-but it was there. It grew and spread until the room was full of it. Other hues came to join it and still others. They wove and wavered; expanding and contracting; changing with lightning speed and yet staying the same. Intricate patterns of brilliant tints formed and faded, beating in silent bursts of color upon the young manís eyeballs.
Simultaneously, there came the impression of sound. From a whisper it rose into a glorious, ringing shout that wavered up and down the scale in quivering tremolos. He seemed to hear every instrument from fife to bass viol simultaneously, and yet, paradoxically, each rang in his ear in solitary clearness.
And together with this, there came the more subtle sensation of odor. From a suspicion, a mere trace, it waxed into a phantasmal field of flowers. Delicate spicy scents followed each other in ever stronger succession; in gentle wafts of pleasure.
Yet all this was nothing. Fields knew that. Somehow, he knew that what he saw, heard, and smelt were mere delusions -mirages of a brain that frantically attempted to interpret an entirely new conception in the old, familiar ways.
Gradually, the colors and the sounds and the scents died. His brain was beginning to realize that that which beat upon it was something hitherto unexperienced. The effect of the hormone became stronger, and suddenly-in one burst-Fields realized what it was he sensed.
He didnít see it-nor hear it-nor smell it-nor taste it- nor feel it. He knew what it was but he couldnít think of the word for it. Slowly, he realized that there wasnít any word for it. Even more slowly, he realized that there wasnít even any concept for it.
Yet he knew what it was.
There beat upon his brain something that consisted of pure waves of enjoyment-something that lifted him out of himself and pitched him headlong into a universe unknown to him earlier. He was falling through an endless eternity of- something. It wasnít sound or sight but it was-something. Something that enfolded him and hid his surroundings from him-thatís what it was. It was endless and infinite in its variety, and with each crashing wave, he glimpsed a farther horizon, and the wonderful cloak of sensation became thicker-and softer-and more beautiful.
Then came the discord. Like a little crack at first-marring a perfect beauty. Then spreading and branching and growing wider, until, finally, if split apart thunderously-though without a sound.
Lincoln Fields, dazed and bewildered, found himself back in the concert room again.
He lurched to his feet and grasped Garth Jan by the arm violently, ìGarth! Why did he stop? Tell him to continue! Tell him!î
Garth Janís startled expression faded into pity, ìHe is still playing, Lincoln.î
The Earthmanís befuddled stare showed no signs of understanding. He gazed about him with unseeing eyes. Novi Lonís fingers sped across the keyboard as nimbly as ever; the expression on his face was as rapt as ever. Slowly, the truth seeped in, and the Earthmanís empty eyes filled with horror.
He sat down, uttering one hoarse cry, and buried his head in his hands.
The five minutes had passed! There could be no return!
Garth Jan was smiling-a smile of dreadful malice, ìI had pitied you just a moment ago, Lincoln, but now Iím glad- glad! You forced this out of me-you made me do this. I hope youíre satisfied, because I certainly am. For the rest of your life,î his voice sank to a sibilant whisper, ìyouíll remember these five minutes and know what it is youíre missing-what it is you can never have again. You are blind, Lincoln-blind!î
The Earthman raised a haggard face and grinned, but it was no more than a horrible baring of the teeth. It took every ounce of willpower he possessed to maintain an air of composure.
He did not trust himself to speak. With wavering step, he marched out of the room, head held high to the end.
And within, that tiny, bitter voice, repeating over and over again, ìYou entered a normal man! You leave blind- blind - BLIND.î



***



The summer of 1939 was full of doubts and uncertainty for me.
In June I had graduated from Columbia and obtained my bachelor of science degree. So far, so good. However, my second round of attempts to enter medical school had failed, as the first had. To be sure, I hadnít really been anxious to go to medical school and I had tried only halfheartedly, but it still left me at loose ends..
What did I do now? I did not wish to look for some nondescript job, even if these were to be found, so I had to continue with my schooling. I had been majoring in chemistry, so, failing medical school, the natural next step was to go for my degree of doctor of philosophy in that field.
The first question was whether I would be able to swing this financially. (It would have been the first question, even more so, if I had gotten into medical school.) College itself had been touch and go all four years, and my small writing income of about $200 during my senior year had been a considerable help.
Naturally, I would have to continue writing and, just as naturally, my depression made it very difficult to write. I managed one story during that summer; it was called ìLife Before Birth.î
ìLife Before Birthî was my first attempt at anything other than science fiction. It was in the allied field of fantasy (as imaginative as science fiction, but without the restriction of requiring scientific plausibility).
The reason for my attempting fantasy was that at the beginning of 1939, Street amp; Smith began the publication of a new magazine, Unknown , of which Campbell was editor.
 Unknown caught my fancy at once. It featured stories of what are now called ìadult fantasy,î and the writing seemed to my nineteen-year-old self to be even more advanced and literate than that in Astounding . Of course I wanted desperately to place a story in this new and wonderful magazine.
ìLife Before Birthî was an attempt in this direction, but aside from the mere fact that it was a fantasy, I remember nothing more about it. It was submitted to Campbell on July 11 and was back in my hands on the nineteenth. It never placed anywhere and no longer exists.
August was even worse. All Europe rang with the hideous possibility of war, and on September 1, World War II began with the German Invasion of Poland. I could do nothing during the crisis but listen to the radio. It was not till September 11 that I could settle down long enough to start another story, ìThe Brothers.î
ìThe Brothersî was science fiction, and all I remember is that it was about two brothers, a good one and an evil one, and a scientific invention that one or the other was constructing. On October 5 I submitted it to Campbell, and on October 11 it was rejected. It, too, never placed and no longer exists.
So the summer had passed fruitlessly and now I had to face another problem. Columbia University was not in the least anxious to take me on as a graduate student. They felt I was going to use the position as a mere way of marking time till I could try once more to get into medical school.
I swore that this was not so, but my position was vulnerable because as a premedical student I had not been required to take a course in physical chemistry and had therefore not done so. Physical chemistry was, however, required for graduate work in chemistry.
I persisted, and finally the admissions board made the following suggestion: I would have to take a full yearís selection of graduate courses, and, at the same time , I would have to take physical chemistry and get at least a B in that. If I failed to get the B, I was out on my ear and my tuition money would, of course, not be refunded.
One of the members of the board told me, some years later, that I was offered this in the belief that I would not accept a set of terms so loaded against me. However, since I had never had trouble with passing courses, it never occurred to me that a set of requirements that merely asked that I achieve certain grades, was loaded against me.
I agreed, and when at the end of the first semester there were only three Aís in physical chemistry out of a class of sixty, and I was one of them, the probation was lifted.
By December I had gotten deeply enough into my course work to be quite certain I would fulfill all grade requirements. The only uncertainty remaining was financial. I had to get back to writing.
On December 21 I began ìHomo Solî and completed it on January 1, 1940, the day before my twentieth birthday. I submitted it on January 4, and on that day, in Campbellís office, I met Theodore Sturgeon and L. Ron Hubbard, two established members of Campbellís stable of writers. (Hubbard has since then become world famous, in a fashion, as the originator of the cults of Dianetics and Scientology.)
There is no sign in my diary of any discouragement, but after a year and a half of assiduous efforts, I had failed to sell Campbell more than one story out of the eighteen I had by then written. He had rejected eight stories before buying ìTrends,î and he had rejected seven stories since. (Two stories, which I sold elsewhere, he never saw and had no chance to reject. Had he seen them he would certainly have rejected them.)
One factor in the lack of discouragement was Campbellís unfailing interest. As long as he didnít get tired reading my stories and advising me about them so kindly, why should I get tired writing them? Then, too, my occasional sales to magazines other than Astounding (there had been six by then) and, especially, the opening up of a new and sympathetic market in the form of Pohlís magazines, helped keep my spirits up.
For ìHomo Sol,î my nineteenth story, there was no outright rejection. Again, Campbell asked for revisions. I had to revise it twice, but it was not to be another ìBlack Friar of the Flame.î The second revision was satisfactory, and on April 17, 1940, I received my second check from Campbell (and, by that time, my seventh check, all told). Whatís more, it was for seventy-two dollars, the story being 7,200 words long, and was the largest check I had ever received for a story up to that time.
Oddly enough, the clearest thing I remember about that check is an incident that took place that evening in my fatherís candy store, where I still worked every day and where I was to continue working for two more years. A customer took offense at my neglecting to say ìThank youî after his purchase-a crime I frequently committed because, very often, I was working without conscious attention but was concentrating deeply on the plot permutations that were sounding hollowly within the cavern of my skull.
The customer decided to scold me for my obvious inattention and apparent lack of industry. ìMy son,î he said, ìmade fifty dollars through hard work last week. What do you do to earn a living?î
ìI write,î I said, ìand I got this for a story today,î and I held up the check for him to see.
It was a very satisfactory moment.








Homo Sol


The seven thousand and fifty-fourth session of the Galactic Congress sat in solemn conclave in the vast semicircular hall on Eon, second planet of Arcturus.
Slowly, the president delegate rose to his feet. His broad Arcturian countenance flushed slightly with excitement as he surveyed the surrounding delegates. His sense of the dramatic caused him to pause a moment or so before making the official announcement-for, after all, the entrance of a new planetary system into the great Galactic family is not a thing likely to happen twice in any one manís lifetime.
A dead silence prevailed during that pause. The two hundred and eighty-eight delegates-one from each of the two hundred and eighty-eight oxygen-atmosphere, water-chemistry worlds of the System-waited patiently for him to speak.
Beings of every manlike type and shape were there. Some were tall and pole-like, some broad and burly, some short and stumpy. There were those with long, wiry hair, those with scanty gray fuzz covering head and face, others with thick, blond curls piled high, and still others entirely bald. Some possessed long, hair-covered trumpets of ears, others had tympanum membranes flush with their temples. There were those present with large gazelle-like eyes of a deep-purple luminosity, others with tiny optics of a beady black. There was a delegate with green skin, one with an eight-inch proboscis and one with a vestigial tail Internally, variation was almost infinite.
But all were alike in two things.
They were all Humanoid. They all possessed intelligence.
The president delegateís voice boomed out then: ìDelegates! The system of Sol has discovered the secret of interstellar travel and by that act becomes eligible for entrance into the Galactic Federation.î
A storm of approving shouts arose from those present and the Arcturian raised a hand for silence.
ìI have here,î he continued, ìthe official report from Alpha Centauri, on whose fifth planet the Humanoids of Sol have landed. The report is entirely satisfactory and so the ban upon travel into and communication with the Solarian System is lifted. Sol is free, and open to the ships of the Federation. Even now, there is in preparation an expedition to Sol, under the leadership of Joselin Arn of Alpha Centauri, to tender that System the formal invitation into the Federation.î
He paused, and from two hundred and eighty-eight throats came the stentorian shout: ìHail, Homo Sol! Hail, Homo Sol! Hail!
It was the traditional welcome of the Federation for all new worlds.
Tan Porus raised himself to his full height of five feet two -he was tall for a Rigellian-and his sharp, green eyes snapped with annoyance.
ìThere it is, Lo-fan. For six months that damned freak squid from Beta Draconis IV has stumped me.î
Lo-fan stroked his forehead gently with one long finger, and one hairy ear twitched several times. He had traveled eighty-five light years to be here on Arcturus II with the greatest psychologist of the Federation-and, more specifically, to see this strange mollusk whose reactions had stumped the great Rigellian.
He was seeing it now: a puffy, dull-purple mass of soft flesh that writhed its tentacular form in placid unconcern through the huge tank of water that held it. With unruffled serenity, it fed on the green fronds of an underwater fern.
ìSeems ordinary enough,î said Lo-fan.
ìHa!î snorted Tan Porus. ìWatch this.î
He drew the curtain and plunged the room into darkness. Only a dim blue light shone upon the tank, and in the murk the Draconian squid could barely be discerned.
ìHere goes the stimulus,î grunted Porus. The screen above his head burst into soft green light, focused directly upon the tank. It persisted a moment and gave way to a dull red and then almost at once to a brilliant yellow. For half a minute it shot raggedly through the spectrum and then, with a final glare of glowing white, a clear bell-like tone sounded.
And as the echoes of the note died away, a shudder passed over the squidís body. It relaxed and sank slowly to the bottom of the tank.
Porus pulled aside the curtain. ìItís sound asleep,î he growled. ìHasnít failed yet. Every specimen weíve ever had drops as if shot the moment that note sounds.î
ìAsleep, eh? Thatís strange. Have you got the figures on the stimulus?î
ìCertainly! Right here. The exact wave lengths of the lights required are listed, plus the length of duration of each light unit, plus the exact pitch of the sounded note at the end.î
The other surveyed the figures dubiously. His forehead wrinkled and his ears rose in surprise. From an. inner pocket, he drew forth a slide rule.
ìWhat type nervous system has the animal?î
ìTwo-B. Plain, simple, ordinary Two-B. Iíve had the anatomists, physiologists, and ecologists check that until they were blue in the face. Two-B is all they get. Damn fools!î
Lo-fan said nothing, but pushed the center bar of the rule back and forth carefully. He stopped and peered closely, shrugged his shoulders, and reached for one of the huge volumes on the shelf above his head. He leafed through the pages and picked out numbers from among the close print. Again the slide rule.
Finally he stopped. ìIt doesnít make sense,î he said helplessly.
ìI know that! Iíve tried six times in six different ways to explain that reaction-and I failed each time. Even. if I rig up a system that will explain its going to sleep, I canít get it to explain the specificity of the stimulus.î
ìItís highly specific?î questioned Lo-fan, his voice reaching the higher registers.
ìThatís the worst part of it,î shouted Tan Porus. He leaned forward and tapped the other on the knee. ìIf you shift the wave length of any of the light units by fifty angstroms either way-any one of them-it doesnít sleep. Shift the length of duration of a light unit two seconds either way-it doesnít sleep. Shift the pitch of the tone at the end an eighth of an octave either way-it doesnít sleep. But get the right combination, and it goes straight into a coma.î
Lo-fanís ears were two hairy trumpets, stiffly erect. ìGalaxy!î he whispered. ìHow did you ever stumble on the combination?î
ìI didnít. It happened at Beta Draconis. Some hick college was putting its freshmen through a lab period on light-sound reactions of molluscoids-been doing it for years. Some student runs through his light-sound combinations and his blasted specimen goes to sleep. Naturally, heís scared out of his wits and brings it to the instructor. The instructor tries it again on another squid-it goes to sleep. They shift the combination- nothing happens. They go back to the original-it goes to sleep. After they fooled around with it long enough to know they couldnít make head or tail of it, they sent it to Arcturus and wished it on me. Itís six months since / had a real nightís sleep.î
A musical note sounded and Porus turned impatiently.
ìWhat is it?î
ìMessenger from the president delegate of Congress, sir,î came in metallic tones from the telecaster on his desk.
ìSend him up.î
The messenger stayed only long enough to hand Porus an impressively sealed envelope and to say in hearty tone:
ìGreat news, sir. The system of Sol has qualified for entrance.î
ìSo what?î snorted Porus beneath his breath as the other left ìWe all knew it was coming.î
He ripped off the outer sheath of cello-fiber from the envelope and removed the sheaf of papers from within. He glanced through them and grimaced.
ìOh, Rigel! î
ìWhatís wrong?î asked Lo-fan.
ìThose politicians keep bothering me with the most inconsequential things. Youíd think there wasnít another psychologist on Eron. Look! Weíve been expecting the Solarian System to solve the principle of the hyperatomo any century now. Theyíve finally done it and an expedition of theirs landed on Alpha Centauri. At once, thereís a politiciansí holiday! We must send an expedition of our own to ask them to join the Federation. And, of course, we must have a psychologist along to ask them in a nice way so as to be sure of getting the right reaction, because, to be sure, there isnít a man in the army that ever gets proper training in psychology.î
Lo-fan nodded seriously. ìI know, I know. We have the same trouble out our way. They donít need psychology until they get into trouble and then they come running.î
ìWell, itís a cinch Iím not going to Sol. This sleeping squid is too important to neglect. Itís a routine job, anyway-this business of raking in new worlds; a Type A reaction that any sophomore can handle.î
ìWhom will you send?î
ìI donít know. Iíve got several good juniors under me that can do this sort of thing with their eyes closed. Iíll send one of them. And meanwhile, Iíll be seeing you at the faculty meeting tomorrow, wonít I?î
ìYou will-and hearing me, too. Iím making a speech on the finger-touch stimulus.î
ìGood! Iíve done work on it, so Iíll be interested in hearing what you have to say. Till tomorrow, then.î
Left alone, Porus turned once more to the official report on the Solarian System which the messenger had handed him. He leafed through it leisurely, without particular interest, and finally put it down with a sigh.
ìLor Haridin could do it,î he muttered to himself. ìHeís a good kid-deserves a break.î
He lifted his tiny bulk out of the chair and, with the report under his arm, left his office and trotted down the long corridor outside. As he stopped before a door at the far end, the automatic flash blazed up and a voice within called out to him to enter.
The Rigellian opened the door and poked his head inside. ìBusy, Haridin?î
Lor Haridin looked up and sprang to his feet at once. ìGreat space, boss, no! I havenít had anything to do since I finished work on anger reactions. Youíve got something for me, maybe?î
ìI have-if you think youíre up to it. Youíve heard of the Solarian System, havenít you?î
ìSure! The visors are full of it. Theyíve got interstellar travel, havenít they?î
ìThatís right. An expedition is leaving Alpha Centauri for Sol in a month. Theyíll need a psychologist to do the fine work, and I was thinking of sending you.î
The young scientist reddened with delight to the very top of his hairless dome. ìDo you mean it, boss?î
ìWhy not? That is-if you think you can do it.î
ìOf course I can.î Haridin drew himself up in offended hauteur. ìType A reaction! I canít miss.î
ìYouíll have to learn their language, you know, and administer the stimulus in the Solarian tongue. Itís not always an easy job.î
Haridin shrugged. ìI still canít miss. In a case like this, translation need only be seventy-five percent effective to get ninety-nine and six tenths percent of the desired result. That was one of the problems I had to solve on my qualifying exam. So you canít trip me up that way.î
Porus laughed. ìAll right, Haridin, I know you can do it. Clean up everything here at the university and sign up for indefinite leave. And if you can, Haridin, write some sort of paper on these Solarians. If itís any good, you might get senior status on the basis of it.î
The junior psychologist frowned, ìBut, boss, thatís old stuff. Humanoid reactions are as well known asÖ as- You canít write anything on them.î
ìThereís always something if you look hard enough, Haridin. Nothing is well known; remember that. If youíll look at Sheet 25 of the report, for instance, youíll find an item concerning the care with which the Solarians armed themselves on leaving their ship.î
The other turned to the proper page. ìThatís reasonable,î said he. ìAn entirely normal reaction.î
ìCertainly. But they insisted on retaining their weapons throughout their stay, even when they were greeted and welcomed by fellow Humanoids. Thatís quite a perceptible deviation from the normal. Investigate it-it might be worth while.î
ìAs you say, boss. Thanks a lot for the chance youíre giving me. And say-howís the squid coming along?î
Porus wrinkled his nose. ìMy sixth try folded up and died yesterday. Itís disgusting.î And with that, he was gone.
Tan Porus of Rigel trembled with rage as he folded the handful of papers he held in two and tore them across. He plugged in the telecaster with a jerk.
ìGet me Santins of the math department immediately,î he snapped.
His green eyes shot fire at the placid figure that appeared on the visor almost at once. He shook his fist at the image.
ìWhat on Eronís the idea of that analysis you sent me just now, you Betelgeusian slime worm?î
The imageís eyebrows shot up in mild surprise. ìDonít blame me, Porus. They were your equations, not mine. Where did you get them?î
ìNever mind where I got them. Thatís the business of the psychology department.î
ìAll right! And solving them is the business of the mathematics department. Thatís the seventh set of the damnedest sort of screwy equations Iíve ever seen. It was the worst yet. You made at least seventeen assumptions which you had no right to make. It took us two weeks to straighten you out, and finally we boiled it down-î
Porus jumped as if stung. ìI know what you boiled it down to. I just tore up the sheets. You take eighteen independent variables in twenty equations, representing two months of work, and solve them out at the bottom of the last, last page with that gem of oracular wisdom-íaí equals ëa.í All that work-and all I get is an identity.î
ìItís still not my fault, Porus. You argued in circles, and in mathematics that means an identity and thereís nothing you can do about it.î His lips twitched in a slow smile. ìWhat are you kicking about, anyway? ëAí does equal ëa,í doesnít it?î
ì Shut up! î The telecaster went dead, and the psychologist closed his lips tightly and boiled inwardly. The light signal above the telecaster flashed to life again.
ìWhat do you want now?î
It was the calm, impersonal voice of the receptionist below that answered him. ìA messenger from the government, sir.î
ìDamn the government! Tell them Iím dead.î
ìItís important, sir. Lor Haridin has returned from Sol and wants to see you.î
Porus frowned. ìSol? What Sol? Oh, I remember. Send him up, but tell him to make it snappy.î
ìCome in, Haridin,î he said a little later, voice calmer, as the young Arcturian, a bit thinner, a bit more weary than he had been six months earlier when he left the Arcturian System, entered.
ìWell, young man? Did you write the paper?î
The Arcturian gazed intently upon his fingernails. ìNo, sir!î
ìWhy not?î Porusí green eyes peered narrowly at the other. ìDonít tell me youíve had trouble.î
ìQuite, a bit, boss.î The words came with an effort. ìThe psychological board itself has sent for you after hearing my report. The fact of the matter is that the Solarian System hasÖ has refused to join the Federation.î
Tan Porus shot out of his chair like a jack-in-the-box and landed, purely by chance, on his feet.
ìWhat!!î
Haridin nodded miserably and cleared his throat.
ìNow, by the Great Dark Nebula,î swore the Rigellian, distractedly, ìif this isnít one sweet day! First, they tell me that ëaí equals ëa,í and then you come in and tell me you muffed a Type A reaction- muffed it completely! î
The junior psychologist fired up. ìI didnít muff it. Thereís something wrong with the Solarians themselves. Theyíre not normal. When I landed they went wild over us. There was a fantastic celebration-entirely unrestrained. Nothing was too good for us. I delivered the invitation before their parliament in their own language-a simple one which they call Esperanto. Iíll stake my life that my translation was ninety-five percent effective.î
ìWell? And then?î
ìI canít understand the rest, boss. First, there was a neutral reaction and I was a little surprised, and thenî-he shuddered in retrospect-îin seven days-only seven days, boss-the entire planet had reversed itself completely. I couldnít follow their psychology, not by a hundred miles. Iíve brought home copies of their newspapers of the time in which they objected to joining with ëalien monstrositiesí and refused to be ëruled by inhumans of worlds parsecs away.í I ask you, does that make sense?
ìAnd thatís only the beginning. It was light years worse than that. Why, good Galaxy, I went all the way into Type G reactions, trying to figure them out, and couldnít. In the end, we had to leave. We were in actual physical danger from thoseÖ those Earthmen, as they call themselves.î
Tan Porus chewed his lip a while. ìInteresting! Have you your report with you?î
ìNo. The psychological board has it. Theyíve been going over it with a microscope all day.î
ìAnd what do they say?î
The young Arcturian winced. ìThey donít say it openly, but they leave a strong impression of thinking the report an inaccurate one.î
ìWell, Iíll decide about that after Iíve read it. Meanwhile, come with me to Parliamentary Hall and you can answer a few questions on the way.î
Joselin Arn of Alpha Centauri rubbed stubbled jaws with his huge, six-fingered hand and peered from under beetling brows at the semicircle of diversified faces that stared down upon him. The psychological board was composed of psychologists of a score of worlds, and their united gaze was not the easiest thing in the world to withstand.
ìWe have been informed,î began Frian Obel, head of the board and native of Vega, home of the green-skinned men, ìthat those sections of the report dealing with Solís military state are your work.î
Joselin Arn inclined his head in silent agreement.
ìAnd you are prepared to confirm what you have stated here, in spite of its inherent improbability? You are no psychologist, you know.î
ìNo! But Iím a soldier!î The Centaurianís jaws set stubbornly as his bass voice rumbled through the hall. ìI donít know equations and I donít know graphs-but I do know spaceships. Iíve seen theirs and Iíve seen ours, and theirs are better. Iíve seen their first interstellar ship. Give them a hundred years and theyíll have a better hyperatomos than we have. Iíve seen their weapons. Theyíve got almost everything we have, at a stage in their history millennia before us. What they havenít got-theyíll get, and soon. What they have got, theyíll improve.
ìIíve seen their munitions plants. Ours are more advanced, but theirs are more efficient. Iíve seen their soldiers-and Iíd rather fight with them than against them.
ìIíve said all that in the report. I say it again now.î
His brusque sentences came to an end and Frian Obel waited for the murmur from the men about him to cease.
ìAnd the rest of their science; medicine, chemistry, physics? What of them?î
ìIím not the best judge of those. You have the report there of those who know, however, and to the best of my knowledge I confirm them.î
ìAnd so these Solarians are true Humanoids?î
ìBy the circling worlds of Centauri, yes!î
The old scientist drew himself back in his chair with a peevish gesture and cast a rapid, frowning glance up and down the length of the table.
ìColleagues,î he said, ìwe make little progress by rehashing this mess of impossibilities. We have a race of Humanoids of a superlatively technological turn; possessing at the same time an intrinsically unscientific belief in supernatural forces, an incredibly childish predilection toward individuality, singly and in groups, and, worst of all, lack of sufficient vision to embrace a galaxy-wide culture.î
He glared down upon the lowering Centaurian before him. ìSuch a race must exist if we are to believe the report-and fundamental axioms of psychology must crumble. But I, for one, refuse to believe any such-to be vulgar about it-comet gas. This is plainly a case of mismanagement to be investigated by the proper authorities. I hope you all agree with me when I say that this report be consigned to the scrap heap and that a second expedition led by an expert in his line, not by an inexperienced junior psychologist or a soldier-î
The drone of the scientistís voice was buried suddenly in the crash of an iron fist against the table. Joselin Am, his huge bulk writhing in anger, lost his temper and gave vent to martial wrath.
ìNow, by the writhing spawn of Templis, by the worms that crawl and the gnats that fly, by the cesspools and the plague spots, and by the hooded death itself, I wonít allow this . Are you to sit there with your theories and your long-range wisdom and deny what I have seen with my eyes? Are my eyesî-and they flashed fire as he spoke-îto deny themselves because of a few wriggling marks your palsied hands trace on paper?
ìTo the core of Centauri with these armchair wise men, say I-and the psychologists first of all. Blast these men who bury themselves in their books and their laboratories and are blind to what goes on in the living world outside. Psychology, is it? Rotten, putrid-î
A tap on his belt caused him to whirl, eyes staring, fists clenched. For a moment, he looked about vainly. Then, turning his gaze downward, he found himself looking into the enigmatic green eyes of a pygmy of a man, whose piercing stare seemed to drench his anger with ice water.
ìI know you, Joselin Am,î said Tan Porus slowly, picking his words carefully. ìYouíre a brave man and a good soldier, but you donít like psychologists, I see. That is wrong of you, for it is on psychology that the political success of the Federation rests. Take it away and our Union crumbles, our great Federation melts away, the Galactic System is shattered.î His voice descended into a soft, liquid croon. ìYou have sworn an oath to defend the System against all its enemies, Joselin Am-and you yourself have now become its greatest. You strike at its foundations. You dig at its roots. You poison it at its source. You are dishonored. You are disgraced. You are a traitor.î
The Centaurian soldier shook his head helplessly. As Porus spoke, deep and bitter remorse filled him. Recollection of his words of a moment ago lay heavy on his conscience. When the psychologist finished, Am bent his head and wept. Tears ran down those lined, war-scarred cheeks, to which for forty years now they had been a stranger.
Porus spoke again, and this time his voice boomed like a thunderclap: ìAway with your mewling whine, you coward. Danger is at hand. Man the guns! î
Joselin Am snapped to attention; the sorrow that had filled him a bare second before was gone as if it had never existed.
The room rocked with laughter and the soldier grasped the situation. It had been Porusí way of punishing him. With his complete knowledge of the devious ins and outs of the Humanoid mind, he had only to push the proper button, and-
The Centaurian bit his lip in embarrassment, but said nothing.
But Tan Porus, himself, did not laugh. To tease the soldier was one thing; to humiliate him, quite another. With a bound, he was on a chair and laid his small hand on the otherís massive shoulder.
ìNo offense, my friend-a little lesson, that is all. Fight the sub-humanoids and the hostile environments of fifty worlds. Dare space in a leaky rattletrap of a ship. Defy whatever dangers you wish. But never, never offend a psychologist. He might get angry in earnest the next time.î
Arn bent his head back and laughed-a gigantic roar of mirth that shook the room with its earthquake-like lustiness.
ìYour advice is well taken, psychologist. Bum me with an atomo, if I donít think youíre right.î He strode from the room with his shoulders still heaving with suppressed laughter.
Porus hopped off the chair and turned to face the board.
ìThis is an interesting race of Humanoids we have stumbled upon, colleagues.î
ìAh,î said Obel, dryly, ìthe great Porus feels bound to come to his pupilís defense. Your digestion seems to have improved, since you feel yourself capable of swallowing Haridinís report.î
Haridin, standing, head bowed, in the corner, reddened angrily, but did not move.
Porus frowned, but his voice kept to its even tone. ìI do, and the report, if properly analyzed, will give rise to a revolution in the science. It is a psychological gold mine; and Homo Sol, the find of the millennium.î
ìBe specific. Tan Porus,î drawled someone. ìYour tricks are all very well for a Centaurian blockhead, but we remain unimpressed.î
The fiery little Rigellian emitted a gurgle of anger. He shook one tiny fist in the direction of the last speaker.
ìIíll be more specific, Inar Tubal, you hairy space bug.î Prudence and anger waged a visible battle within him. ìThere is more to a Humanoid than you think-certainly far more than you mental cripples can understand. Just to show you what you donít know, you desiccated group of fossils, Iíll undertake to show you a bit of psycho-technology thatíll knock the guts right out of you. Panic, morons, panic! Worldwide panic!î
There was an awful silence. ìDid you say world-wide panic?î stuttered Frian Obel, his green skin turning gray. ìPanic?î
ìYes, you parrot. Give me six months and fifty assistants and Iíll show you a world of Humanoids in panic.î
Obel attempted vainly to answer. His mouth worked in a heroic attempt to remain serious-and failed. As though by signal, the entire board dropped its dignity and leaned back in a single burst of laughter.
ìI remember,î gasped Inar Tubal of Sirius, his round face streaked with tears of pure joy, ìa student of mine who once claimed to have discovered a stimulus that would induce world-wide panic. When I checked his results, I came across an exponent with a misplaced decimal point. He was only ten orders of magnitude out of the way. How many decimal points have you misplaced, Colleague Porus?î
ìWhat of Krautís Law, Porus, which says you canít panic more than five Humanoids at a time? Shall we pass a resolution repealing it? And maybe the atomic theory as well, while weíre about it?î and Semper Gor of Capella cackled gleefully.
Porus climbed onto the table and snatched Obelís gavel. ìThe next one who laughs is getting this over his empty head.î There was sudden silence.
ìIím taking fifty assistants,î shouted the green-eyed Rigellian, ìand Joselin Am is taking me to Sol. I want five of you to come with me-Inar Tubal, Semper Gor and any three others -so that I can watch their stupid faces when Iíve done what I said I would.î He hefted the gavel, threateningly. ìWell?î
Frian Obel gazed at the ceiling placidly. ìAll right, Porus. Tubal. Gor. Helvin, Prat, and Winson can go with you. At the end of the specified time, weíll witness world-wide panic which will be very gratifying-or weíll watch you eat your words, and how much more gratifying that would be.î And with that, he chuckled very quietly to himself.
Tan Porus stared thoughtfully out the window. Terrapolis, capital city of Earth, sprawled beneath him to the very edge of the horizon. Its muted roar reached even to the half-mile height at which he stood.
There was something over that city, invisible and intangible but none the less real. Its presence was only too evident to the small psychologist. The choking, cloak of dank fear that spread over the metropolis beneath was one of his own weaving-a horrible cloak of dark uncertainty, that clutched with clammy fingers at the hearts of Mankind and stopped short -just short-of actual panic.
The roar of the city had voices in it, and the voices were tiny ones of fear.
The Rigellian turned away in disgust. ìHey, Haridin,î he roared.
The young Arcturian turned away from the televisor. ìCalling me, boss?î
ìWhat do you think Iím doing? Talking to myself? Whatís the latest from Asia?î
ìNothing new. The stimuli just arenít strong enough. The yellow men seem to be more stolid of disposition than the white dominants of America and Europe. Iíve sent out orders not to increase the stimuli, though.î
ìNo, they mustnít,î agreed Porus. ìWe canít risk active panic.î He ruminated in silence. ìListen, weíre about through. Tell them to hit a few of the big cities-theyíre more susceptible-and quit.î
He turned to the window again. ìSpace, what a world- what a world! An entirely new branch of psychology has opened up-one we never dreamed of. Mob psychology, Haridin, mob psychology.î He shook his head impressively.
ìThereís lots of suffering, though, boss,î muttered the younger man. ìThis passive panic has completely paralyzed trade and commerce. The business life of the entire planet is stagnant. The poor government is helpless-they donít know whatís wrong.î
ìTheyíll find out-when Iím ready. And, as for the suffering-well, I donít like it, either, but itís all a means to an end, a damned important end.î
There followed a short silence, and then Porusí lips twitched into a nasty smile. ìThose five nitwits returned from Europe yesterday, didnít they?î
Haridin smiled in turn and nodded vigorously, ìAnd hopping sore! Your predictions have checked to the fifth decimal place. Theyíre fit to be tied.î
ìGood! Iím only sorry I canít see Obelís face right now, after the last message I sent him. And, incidentallyî-his voice dropped lower-îwhatís the latest on them? î
Haridin raised two fingers. ìTwo weeks, and theyíll be here.î
ìTwo weeksÖ two weeks,î gurgled Porus jubilantly. He rose and made for the door. ìI think Iíll find my dear, dear colleagues and pass the time of day.î
The five scientists of the board looked up from their notes and fell into an embarrassed silence as Porus entered.
The latter smiled impishly. ìNotes satisfactory, gentlemen? Found some fifty or sixty fallacies in my fundamental assumptions, no doubt?î
Hybron Prat of Alpha Cepheus rumpled the gray fuzz he called hair. ìI donít trust the unholy tricks this crazy mathematical notation of yours plays.î
The Rigellian emitted a short bark of laughter. ìInvent a better, then. So far, itís done a good job of handling reactions, hasnít it?î
There was an unmusical chorus of throat-clearings but no definite answer.
ìHasnít it?î thundered Porus.
ìWell, what if it has,î returned Kim Winson, desperately. ìWhereís your panic? All this is well and good. These Humanoids are cosmic freaks, but whereís the big show you were going to put on? Until you break Krautís Law, this entire exhibition of yours isnít worth a pinhead meteor.î
ìYouíre beaten, gentlemen, youíre beaten,î crowed the small master psychologist. ìIíve proven my point-this passive panic is as impossible according to classic psychology as the active form. Youíre trying to deny facts and save face now, by harping on a technicality. Go home; go home, gentlemen, and hide under the bed.î
Psychologists are only human. They can analyze the motives that drive them, but they are the slave of those motives just as much as the commonest mortal of all. These galaxy-famous psychologists writhed under the lash of wounded pride and shattered vanity, and their blind stubbornness was the mechanical reaction due therefrom. They knew it was and they knew Porus knew it was-and that made it all the harder.
Inar Tubal stared angrily from red-rimmed eyes. ìActive panic or nothing. Tan Porus. Thatís what you promised, and thatís what weíll have. We want the letter of the bond or, by space and time, weíll balk at any technicality. Active panic or we report failure!î
Porus swelled ominously and, with a tremendous effort, spoke quietly. ìBe reasonable, gentlemen. We havenít the equipment to handle active panic. Weíve never come up against this superform they have here on Earth. What if it gets beyond control?î He shook his head violently.
ìIsolate it, then,î snarled Semper Gor. ìStart it up and put it out. Make all the preparations you want, but do it!î
ìIf you can,î grunted Hybron Prat.
But Tan Porus had his weak point. His brittle temper lay in splintered shards about him. His agile tongue blistered the atmosphere and inundated the sullen psychologist with wave after wave of concentrated profanity.
ìHave your way, vacuumheads! Have your way and to outer space with you!î He was breathless with passion. ìWeíll set it off right here in Terrapolis as soon as all the men are back home. Only youíd all better get from under!î
And with one last parting snarl, he stalked from the room.
Tan Porus parted the curtains with a sweep of his hand, and the five psychologists facing him averted their eyes. The streets of Earthís capital were deserted of civilian population. The ordered tramp of the military patrolling the highways of the city sounded like a dirge. The wintry sky hung low over a scene of strewn bodies-and silence; the silence that follows an orgy of wild destruction.
ìIt was touch and go for a few hours there, colleagues.î Porusí voice was tired. ìIf it had passed the city limits, we could never have stopped it.î
ìHorrible, horrible!î muttered Hybron Prat. ìIt was a scene a psychologist would have given his right arm to witness- and his life to forget.î
ìAnd these are Humanoids!î groaned Kim Winson.
Semper Gor rose to his feet in sudden decision. ìDo you see the significance of this, Porus? These Earthmen are sheer uncontrolled atomite. They canít be handled. Were they twice the technological geniuses they are, they would be useless. With their mob psychology, their mass panics, their superemotionalism, they simply wonít fit into the Humanoid picture.î
Porus raised an eyebrow. ìComet gas! Individually, we are as emotional as they are. They carry it into mass action and we donít; thatís the only difference.î
ìAnd thatís enough!î exclaimed Tubal. ìWeíve made our decision, Porus. We made it last night, at the height of theÖ theÖ of it. The Solar System is to be left to itself. It is a plague spot and we want none of it. As far as the Galaxy is concerned. Homo Sol will be placed in strict quarantine. That is final!î
The Rigellian laughed softly. ìFor the Galaxy, it may be final. But for Homo Sol?î
Tubal shrugged. ìThey donít concern us.î
Porus laughed again. ìSay, Tubal. Just between the two of us, have you tried a time integration of Equation 128 followed by expansion with Karolean tensors?î
ìNo-o. I canít say I have.î
ìWell, then, just glance up and down these calculations and enjoy yourself.î
The five scientists of the board grouped themselves about the sheets of paper Porus had handed them. Expressions changed from interest to bewilderment and then to something approaching panic.
Nam Helvin tore the sheets across with a spasmodic movement. ìItís a lie,î he screeched.
ìWeíre a thousand years ahead of them now, and by that time weíll be advanced another two hundred years!î Tubal snapped. ìThey wonít be able to do anything against the mass of the Galaxyís people.î
Tan Porus laughed in a monotone, which is hard to do, but very unpleasant to hear. ìYou still donít believe mathematics. Thatís in your behavior pattern, of course. All right, letís see if experts convince you-as they should, unless contact with these off-normal Humanoids has twisted you. Joselin-Joselin Am-come in here!î
The Centaurian commander came in, saluted automatically, and looked expectant.
ìCan one of your ships defeat one of the Sol ships in battle, if necessary?î 214
Arn grinned sourly. ìNot a chance, sir. These Humanoids break Krautís Law in panic-and also in fighting. We have a corps of experts manning our ships; these people have a single crew that functions as a unit, without individuality. They manifest a form of fighting-panic, I imagine, is the best word. Every individual on a ship becomes an organ of the ship. With us, as you know, thatís impossible.
ìFurthermore, this worldís a mass of mad geniuses. They have, to my certain knowledge, taken no less than twenty-two interesting but useless gadgets they saw in the Thalsoon Museum when they visited us, turned ëem inside out, and produced from them some of the most unpleasant military devices Iíve seen. You know of Julmun Thillís gravitational line tracer? Used-rather ineffectively-for spotting ore deposits before the modem electric potential method came in?
ìTheyíve turned it-somehow-into one of the deadliest automatic fire directors itís been my displeasure to see. It will automatically lay a gun or projector on a completely invisible target in space, air, water or rock, for that matter.î
ìWe,î said Tan Porus, gleefully, ìhave far greater fleets than they. We could overwhelm them, could we not?î
Joselin Am shook his head. ìDefeat them now-probably. It wouldnít be overwhelming, though, and I wouldnít bet on it too heavily. Certainly wouldnít invite it. The trouble is, in a military way, this collection of gadget maniacs invent things at a horrible rate. Technologically, theyíre as unstable as a wave in water; our civilization is more like a sanddune. Iíve seen their ground-car plants install a complete plant of machine tools for production of a new model of automobile-and rip it out in six months because itís completely obsolete!
ìNow weíve come in contact with their civilization briefly. Weíve learned the methods of one new civilization to add to our previous two hundred and eighty-odd-a small percentage advantage. Theyíve added one new civilization to their previous one-a one-hundred-percent advance!î
ìHow about,î Porus asked gently, ìour military position if we simply ignore them completely for two hundred years?î
Joselin Am gave an explosive little laugh. ì If we could- which means if theyíd let us-Iíd answer offhand and with assurance. Theyíre all Iíd care to tackle right now. Two hundred years of exploring the new tracks suggested by their brief contact with us and theyíd be doing things I canít imagine. Wait two hundred years and there wonít be a battle; thereíll be an annexation.î
Tan Porus bowed formally. ìThank you, Joselin Arn. That was the result of my mathematical work.î
Joselin Arn saluted and left the room.
Turning to the five thoroughly paralyzed scientists, Porus went on: ìAnd I hope these learned gentlemen still react in a vaguely Humanoid way. Are you convinced that it is not up to us to decide to end all intercourse with this race? Weí may -but they wonít!
ìFoolsî-he spat out the word-îdo you think Iím going to waste time arguing with you? Iím laying down the law, do you understand? Homo Sol shall enter the Federation. They are going to be trained into maturity in two hundred years. And Iím not asking you; Iím telling you! î The Rigellian stared up at them truculently.
ìCome with me!î he growled brusquely.
They followed in tame submission and entered Tan Porusí sleeping quarters. The little psychologist drew aside a curtain and revealed a life-size painting.
ìMake anything of that?î
It was the portrait of an Earthman, but of such an Earthman as none of the psychologists had yet seen. Dignified and sternly handsome, with one hand stroking a regal beard, and the other holding the single flowing garment that clothed him, he seemed personified majesty.
ìThatís Zeus,î said Porus. ìThe primitive Earthmen created him as the personification of storm and lightning.î He whirled upon the bewildered five. ìDoes it remind you of anybody?î
ìHomo Canopus?î ventured Helvin uncertainly.
For a moment, Porusí face relaxed in momentary gratification and then it hardened again. ìOf course,î he snapped. ìWhy do you hesitate about it? Thatís Canopus to the life, down to the full yellow beard.î
Then: ìHereís something else.î He drew another curtain.
The portrait was of a female, this time. Full-bosomed and wide-hipped she was. An ineffable smile graced her face and her hands seemed to caress the stalks of grain that sprang thickly about her feet.
ìDemeter!î said Porus. ìThe personification of agricultural fertility. The idealized mother. Whom does that remind you of?î
There was no hesitation this time. Five voices rang out as one: ìHomo Betelgeuse!î
Tan Porus smiled in delight. ìThere you have it Well?î
ìWell?î said Tubal.
ìDonít you see?î The smile faded. ìIsnít it clear? Nitwit! If a hundred Zeuses and a hundred Demeters were to land on Earth as part of a ëtrade mission,í and turned out to be trained psychologists-Now do you see?î
Semper Gor laughed suddenly. ìSpace, time, and little meteors. Of course! The Earthmen would be putty in the hands of their own personifications of storm and motherhood come to life. In two hundred years-why, in two hundred years, we could do anything.î
ìBut this so-called trade mission of yours, Porus,î interposed Prat. ìHow would you get Homo Sol to accept it in the first place?î
Porus cocked his head to one side. ìDear Colleague Prat,î he murmured, ìdo you suppose that I created the passive panic just for the show-or just to gratify five woodenheads? This passive panic paralyzed industry, and the Terrestrial government is faced with revolution-another form of mob action that could use investigation. Offer them Galactic trade and eternal prosperity and do you think theyíd jump at it? Has matter mass?î
The Rigellian cut short the excited babble that followed with an impatient gesture. ìIf youíve nothing more to ask, gentlemen, letís begin our preparations to leave. Frankly, Iím tired of Earth, and, more than that, Iím blasted anxious to get back to that squid of mine.î
He opened the door and shouted down the corridor: ìHey, Haridini Tell Arn to have the ship ready in six hours. Weíre leaving.î
ìButÖ but-î The chorus of puzzled objections crystallized into sudden action as Semper Gor dashed at Porus and snatched him back as he was on the point of leaving. The little Rigellian struggled vainly in the otherís powerful grasp.
ìLet go!î
ìWeíve endured enough, Porus,î said Gor, ìand now youíll just calm down and behave like a Humanoid. Whatever you say, weíre not leaving until weíre finished. Weíve got to arrange with the Terrestrial government concerning the trade mission. Weíve got to secure approval of the board. Weíve got to pick our psychologist. Weíve got to-î
Here Porus, with a sudden jerk, freed himself. ìDo you suppose for one moment that I would wait for your precious board to start to begin to commence to consider doing something about the situation in two or three decades?
ìEarth agreed to my terms unconditionally a month ago. The squad of Canopans and Betelgeusans set sail five months ago, and landed day before yesterday. It was only with their help that we managed to stop yesterdayís panic-though you never suspected it. You probably thought you did it yourself. Today, gentlemen, they have the situation in full control and your services are no longer needed. Weíre going home.î



***



ìHomo Solî has a plot of a sort that particularly appealed to Campbell. Although the human beings in the story are far behind the other intelligences of the Galaxy, it is clear that there is something special about them, that they have an unusual ability to move ahead very quickly, and that everyone else had better watch out for them.
Campbell liked stories in which human beings proved themselves superior to other intelligences, even when those others were further advanced technologically. It pleased him to have human beings shown to possess a unique spirit of daring, or a sense of humor, or a ruthless ability to kill when necessary, that always brought them victory over other intelligences, even against odds.
I sometimes got the uncomfortable notionª however, that this attitude reflected Campbellís feelings on the smaller, Earth scale. He seemed to me to accept the natural superiority of Americans over non-Americans, and he seemed automatically to assume the picture of an American as one who was of northwest European origin.
I cannot say that Campbell was racist in any evil sense of the term. I cannot recall any act of his that could be construed as unkind, and certainly he never, not once , made me feel uncomfortable over the fact that I was Jewish. Nevertheless, he did seem to take for granted, somehow, the stereotype of the Nordic white as the true representative of Man the Explorer, Man the Darer, Man the Victor,
I argued with him strenuously on the subject, or as violently as I dared, and in years to come our relationship was to be as nearly strained as it could be (considering our mutual affection, and all that I owed him) over the civil rights issue. I was on the liberal side of the issue, he on the conservative, and our minds never met on that subject.
All this had an important bearing on my science fiction work. I did not like Campbellís attitude concerning humanity vis-a-vis other intelligences and it took two revisions of ìHomo Solî before Campbell could move me close enough to what he wanted. Even then, he inserted several paragraphs, here and there, without consulting me, in the final version.
I tried to avoid such a situation in future. One way out was to depart from the traditions of those writers who wove plots against the gigantic web of entire galaxies containing many intelligences-notably those of E. E. Smith and of Campbell himself. Instead, I began to think of stories involving a galaxy populated by human intelligences only.
This came to fruit, soon enough, in. the ìFoundationî series. Undoubtedly the Smith-Campbell view makes more sense. It is almost certain that among the hundreds of billions of worlds in a large galaxy there ought to be hundreds or even thousands of different intelligent species. That there should be only one, ourselves, as I postulated, is most unlikely.
Some science fiction critics (notably Sam Moskowitz) have given me credit for inventing the human-only galaxy, as though it were some kind of literary advance. Others may have thought privately (I have never heard it stated openly) that I had only human intelligences in my galaxy because I lacked the imagination to think up extraterrestrials.
But the fact is that I was only trying to avoid a collision with Campbellís views; I did not want to set up a situation in which I would be forced to face the alternatives of adopting Campbellís views when I found them repugnant and failing to sell a story (which I also found repugnant).
On March 25, 1940, the day I put through my final submission of ìHomo Sol,î I went on to visit Fred Pohl at his office. He told me that the response to ìHalf-Breedî had been such that he felt justified in asking for a sequel. It was the first time I had ever been requested to write a specific story with acceptance virtually guaranteed in advance.
I spent April and May working on the sequel, ìHalf-Breeds on Venus,î and submitted it to Pohl on June 3. On June 14, he accepted it. The story was ten thousand words long, the longest I had ever sold up to that time. Whatís more, Pohlís magazines were doing so well that his budget had been increased and he was able to pay me five eighths of a cent a word for it-$62.50.
It appeared in the issue of Astonishing that reached the stands on October 24, 1940, two years almost to a day since my first sale. This was a red-letter day for me, too, since it was the first time that the cover painting on a magazine was ever taken from one of my stories. I had ìmade the cover.î
The title of the story and my name were on the cover in bold letters. It was a flattering indication that my name could be counted on to sell magazines by this time.








Half-Breeds on Venus


The damp, somnolent atmosphere stirred violently and shrieked aside. The bare plateau shook three times as the heavy egg-shaped projectiles shot down from outer space. The sound of the landing reverberated from the mountains on one side to the lush forest on the other, and then all was silent again.
One by one, three doors clanged open, and human figures stepped out in hesitant single file. First slowly, and then with impatient turbulence, they set first foot upon the new world, until the space surrounding the ships was crowded.
A thousand pairs of eyes gazed upon the prospect and a thousand mouths chattered excitedly. And in the other-world wind, a thousand crests of foot-high white hair swayed gracefully.
The Tweenies had landed on Venus!
Max Scanlon sighed wearily, ìHere we are!î
He turned from the porthole and slumped into his own special arm-chair. ìTheyíre as happy as children-and I donít blame them. Weíve got a new world-one all for ourselves- and thatís a great thing. But just the same, there are hard days ahead.of us. I am almost afraid! It is a project so lightly embarked upon, but one so hard to carry out to completion.î
A gentle arm stole about his shoulder and he grasped it tightly, smiling into the soft, blue eyes that met his. ìBut youíre not afraid, are you, Madeline?î
ìCertainly not!î And then her expression grew sadder, ìIf only father had come with us. You-you know that he meant more to us than to the others. We were the-the first he took under his wing, werenít we?î
There was a long silence after that as each fell into deep thought.
Max sighed, ìI remember him that day forty years ago- old suit, pipe, everything. He took me in. Me, a despised half-breed! And-and he found you for me, Madeline!î
ìI know,î there were tears in her eyes. ìBut heís still with us, Max, and always will be-here, and there.î Her hand crept first to her own heart and then to Maxís.
ìHey, there, Dad, catch her, catch her!î
Max whirled at the sound of his elder sonís voice, just in time to catch up the little bundle of flying arms and legs that catapulted into him.
He held her gravely up before him, ìShall I give you to your papa, Elsie? He wants you.î
The little girl kicked her legs ecstatically. ìNo, no. I want you, grand-daddy. I want you to give me a piggy-back and come out with grandmamma to see how nice everything is.î
Max turned to his son, and motioned him sternly away, ìDepart, despised father, and let old grand-dad have a chance.î
Arthur laughed and mopped a red face, ìKeep her, for Heavenís sake. Sheís been leading me and the wife a merry chase outside. We had to drag her back by the dress to keep her from running off into the forest. Didnít we, Elsie?î
Elsie, thus appealed to, suddenly recalled a past grievance. ìGrand-daddy, tell him to let me see the pretty trees. He doesnít want me to.î She wriggled from Maxís grasp and ran to the porthole. ìSee them, grand-daddy, see them. Itís all trees outside. Itís not black anymore. I hated it when it was black, didnít you?î
Max leaned over and ruffled the childís soft, white hair gravely, ìYes, Elsie, I hated it when it was black. But it isnít black anymore, and it wonít ever be black again. Now go run to grandmamma. Sheíll get some cake specially for you. Go ahead, run!î
He followed the departing forms of his wife and granddaughter with smiling eyes, and then, as they turned to his son, they became serious once more.
ìWell, Arthur?î
ìWell, dad, what now?î
ìThereís no time to waste, son. Weíve got to start building immediately-underground!î
Arthur snapped into an attentive attitude, ìUnderground!î He frowned his dismay.
ìI know, I know. I said nothing of this previously, but itís got to be done. At all costs we must vanish from the face of the System. There are Earthmen on Venus-purebloods. There arenít many, itís true, but there are some. They mustnít find us-at least, not until we are prepared for whatever may follow. That will take years.î
ìBut father, underground! To live like moles, hidden from light and air. I donít like that.î
ìOh, nonsense. Donít overdramatize. Well live on the surface-but the city; the power-stations, the food and water reserves, the laboratories-all that must be below and impregnable.î
The old Tweenie gestured the subject away with impatience, ìForget that, anyway. I want to talk about something else- something weíve discussed already.î
Arthurís eyes hardened and he shifted his glance to the ceiling. Max rose and placed his bands upon his sonís brawny shoulders.
ìIím past sixty, Arthur. How long I have yet to live, I donít know. In any case, the best of me belongs to the past and it is better that I yield the leadership to a younger, more vigorous person.î
ìDad, thatís sentimental bosh and you know it. There isnít one of us thatís fit to wipe your shoes and no one is going to listen for a second to any plan of appointing a successor while youíre still alive.î
ìIím not going to ask them to listen. Itís done-and youíre the new leader.î
The younger man shook his head firmly, ìYou canít make me serve against my will.î
Max smiled whimsically, ìIím afraid youíre dodging responsibility, son. Youíre leaving your poor old father to the strains and hardships of a job beyond his aged strength.î
ìDad!î came the shocked retort. ìThatís not so. You know it isnít. You-î
ìThen prove it. Look at it this way. Our race needs active leadership, and I canít supply it. Iíll always be here-while I live-to advise you and help you as best I can, but from now on, you must take the initiative.î
Arthur frowned and the words came from him reluctantly, ìAll right, then. I take the job of field commander. But remember, youíre commander-in-chief.î
ìGood! And now letís celebrate the occasion.î Max opened a cupboard and withdrew a box, from which he abstracted a pair of cigars. He sighed, ìThe supply of tobacco is down to the vanishing point and we wonít have any more until we grow our own, but- weíll smoke to the new leader.î
Blue smoke curled upwards and Max frowned through it at his son, ìWhereís Henry?î
Arthur grinned, ìDunno! I havenít seen him since we landed. I can tell you with whom he is, though.î
Max grunted, ìI know that, too.î
ìThe kidís making hay while the sun shines. It wonít be many years now. Dad, before youíll be spoiling a second set of grandchildren.î
ìIf theyíre as good as the three of my first set, I only hope I live to see the day.î
And father and son smiled affectionately at each other and listened in silence to the muted sound of happy laughter from the hundreds of Tweenies outside.
Henry Scanlon cocked his head to one side, and raised his hand for silence, ìDo you hear running water, Irene?î
The girl at his side nodded, ìOver in that direction.î
ìLetís go there, then. A river flashed by just before we landed and maybe thatís it.î
ìAll right, if you say so, but I think we ought to be getting back to the ships.î
ìWhat for?î Henry stopped and stared. ìI should think youíd be glad to stretch your legs after weeks on a crowded ship.î
ìWell, it might be dangerous.î
ìNot here in the highlands, Irene. Venusian highlands are practically a second Earth. You can see this is forest and not jungle. Now if we were in the coastal regions-î He broke off short, as if he had just remembered something. ìBesides, whatís there to be afraid of? Iím with you, arenít I?î And he patted the Tonite gun at his hip.
Irene repressed a sudden smile and shot an arch glance at her strutting companion, ìIím quite aware that youíre with me. Thatís the danger.î
Henryís chest deflated with an audible gasp. He frowned. ì Very funny-And I on my best behavior, too.î He drifted away, brooded sulkily awhile, and then addressed the trees in a distant manner, ìWhich reminds me that tomorrow is Daphneís birthday. Iíve promised her a present.î
ìGet her a reducing belt,î came the quick retort. ìFat thing!î
ìWhoís fat? Daphne? Oh-I wouldnít say so.î He considered matters carefully, one thoughtful eye upon the young girl at his side. ìNow my description of her would be-shall we say-ípleasingly plump,í or, maybe, ëcomfortably upholstered.í ì
ìSheís fat ,î Ireneís voice was suddenly a hiss, and something very like a frown wrinkled her lovely face, ìand her eyes are green.î She swung on ahead, chin high, and superbly conscious of her own little figure.
Henry hastened his steps and caught up, ìOf course, I prefer skinny girls any day.
Irene whirled on him and her little fists clenched, ìIím not skinny, you incredibly stupid ape.î
ìBut Irene, who said I meant you?î His voice was solemn, but his eyes were laughing,
The girl reddened to the ears and turned away, lower lip trembling. The smile faded from Henryís eyes and was replaced by a look of concern. His arm shot out hesitantly and slipped about her shoulder.
ìAngry, Irene?î
The smile that lit her face of a sudden was as brilliant as the sparkling sheen of her silvery hair in the bright sun.
ìNo,î she said.
Their eyes met and, for a moment, Henry hesitated-and found that he who hesitates is lost; for with a sudden twist and a smothered laugh, Irene was free once more.
Pointing through a break in the trees, she cried, ìLook, a lake!î and was off at a run.
Henry scowled, muttered something under his breath, and ran after.
The scene was truly Earthly. A rapids-broken stream wound its way through banks of slender-trunked trees and then spread into a placid lake some miles in width. The brooding quiet was unbroken save by the muffled beat that issued from the throat-bags of the frilled lizards that nested in the upper reaches of the trees.
The two Tweenies-boy and girl-stood hand in hand upon the bank and drank in the beauty of the scene.
Then there was a muffled splash near by and Irene shrank into the encircling arms of her companion.
ìWhatís the matter?î
ìN-nothing. Something moved in the water, I think.î
ìOh, imagination, Irene.î
ìNo. I did see something. It came up and-oh, goodness, Henry, donít squeeze so tightly-î
She almost lost her balance as Henry suddenly dropped her altogether and jerked at his Tonite gun.
Immediately before them, a dripping green head lifted out of the water and regarded them out of wide-set, staring goggle-eyes. Its broad lipless mouth opened and closed rapidly, but not a sound issued forth.
Max Scanlon stared thoughtfully at the rugged foot-hills ahead and clasped his hands behind his back.
ìYou think so, do you?î
ìCertainly, Dad,î insisted Arthur, enthusiastically. ìIf we burrow under these piles of granite, all Earth couldnít get at us. It wouldnít take two months to form the entire cavern, with our unlimited power.î
ìHmph! It will require care!î
ìIt will get it!î
ìMountainous regions are quake regions.î
ìWe can rig up enough stat-rays to hold up all Venus, quakes or no quakes.î
ìStat-rays eat up energy wholesale, and a breakdown that will leave us energyless would mean the end.î
ìWe can hook up five separate power-houses,-as foolproof as we can make them. All five wonít break down at once.î
The old Tweenie smiled, ìAll right, son. I see youíve got it planned thoroughly. Go ahead! Start whenever you want-and remember, itís all up to you.î
ìGood! Letís get back to the ships.î They picked their way gingerly down the rocky, slope.
ìYou know, Arthur,î said Max, stopping suddenly, ìIíve been thinking about those stat-beams.î
ìYes?î Arthur offered his arm, and the two resumed their walk.
ìItís occurred to me that if we could make them two-dimensional in extent and curve them, weíd have the perfect defense, as long as our energy lasted-a stat-field.î
ìYou need four-dimensional radiation for that. Dad-nice to think about but canít be done.î
ìOh, is that so? Well, listen to this-î
What Arthur was to listen to remained hidden, however- for that day at least. A piercing shout ahead jerked both their heads upward. Up towards them came the bounding form of Henry Scanlon, and following him, at a goodly distance and a much more leisurely pace, came Irene.
ìSay, Dad, I had a devil of a time finding you. Where were you?î
ìRight here, son. Where were you?î
ìOh, just around. Listen, Dad. You know those amphibians the explorers talk about as inhabiting the highland lakes of Venus, donít you? Well, weíve located them, lots of them, a regular convoy of them. Havenít we, Irene?î
Irene paused to catch her breath and nodded her head, ìTheyíre the cutest things, Mr. Scanlon. All green.î She wrinkled her nose laughingly.
Arthur and his father exchanged glances of doubt. The former shrugged. ìAre you sure you havenít been seeing things? I remember once. Henry, when you sighted a meteor in space, scared us all to death, and then had it turn out to be your own reflection in the port glass.î
Henry, painfully aware of Ireneís snicker, thrust out a belligerent lower lip, ìSay, Art, I guess youíre looking for a shove in the face. And Iím old enough to give it to you, too.î
ìWhoa there, quiet down,î came the peremptory voice of the elder Scanlon, ìand you, Arthur, had better leam to respect your younger brotherís dignity. Now here. Henry, all Arthur meant was that these amphibians are as shy as rabbits. No oneís ever caught more than a glimpse of them.î
ìWell, we have. Dad. Lots of them. I guess they were attracted by Irene. No one can resist her.î
ìI know you canít,î and Arthur laughed loudly.
Henry stiffened once more, but his father stepped between. ìGrow up, you two. Letís go and see these amphibians.î
ìThis is amazing,î exclaimed Max Scanlon. ìWhy, theyíre as friendly as children. I canít understand it.î
Arthur-shook his head, ìNeither can I, Dad. In fifty years, no explorer has ever gotten a good look at one, and here they are-thick as flies.î
Henry was throwing pebbles into the lake. ìWatch this, all of you.î
A pebble curved its way into the water, and as it splashed six green forms turned a back somersault and slid smoothly below the surface. With no time for a breath between, one was up again and the pebble arced back to fall at Henryís feet.
The amphibians were crowding closer in ever increasing numbers now, approaching the very edge of the lake, where they grasped at the coarse reeds on the bank and stared goggle-eyed at the Tweenies. Their muscular webbed, legs could be seen below the surface of the water, moving back and forth with lazy grace. Without cessation, the lipless mouths opened and closed in a queer, uneven rhythm.
ìI think theyíre talking, Mr. Scanlon,î said Irene, suddenly.
ìItís quite possible,î agreed the old Tweenie, thoughtfully. ìTheir brain-cases are fairly large, and they may possess considerable intelligence. If their voice boxes and ears are tuned to sound waves of higher or lower range than our own, we would be unable to hear them-and that might very well explain their soundlessness.î
ìTheyíre probably discussing us as busily as we are them,î said Arthur.
ìYes, and wondering what sort of freaks we are,î added Irene.
Henry said nothing. He was approaching the edge of the lake with cautious steps. The ground grew muddy beneath his feet, and the reeds thick. The group of amphibians nearest turned anxious eyes toward him, and one or two loosened their hold and slipped silently away.
But the nearest held his ground. His wide mouth was clamped tight; his eyes were wary-but he did not move.
Henry, paused, hesitated, and then held out his hand, ìHiya, Phib!î
The ìPhibî stared at the outstretched hand. Very cautiously, his own webbed forelimb stretched out and touched the Tweenieís fingers. With a jerk, they were drawn back, and the Phibís mouth worked in soundless excitement.
ìBe careful,î came Maxís voice from behind. ìYouíll scare him that way. His skin is terribly sensitive and dry objects must irritate him. Dip your hand in the water.î
Slowly, Henry obeyed. The Phibís muscles tensed to escape at the slightest sudden motion, but none came. Again the Tweenieís hand was held out, dripping wet this time.
For a long minute, nothing happened, as the Phib seemed to debate within itself the future course of action. And then, after two false starts and hasty withdrawals, fingers touched again.
ìAtaphib,î said Henry, and clasped the green hand in his own.
A single, startled jerk followed and then a lusty return of pressure to an extent that numbed the Tweenieís fingers. Evidently encouraged by the first Phibís example, his fellows were crowding close now, offering hosts of hands.
The other three Tweenies slushed up through the mud now, and offered wetted hands in their turn.
ìThatís funny,î said Irene. ìEverytime I shake hands I seem to keep thinking of hair.î
Max turned to her, ìHair?î
ìYes, ours. I get a picture of long, white hair, standing straight up and shining in the sun.î Her hand rose unconsciously to her own smooth tresses.
ìSay!î interrupted Henry suddenly, ìIíve been noticing that, too, now that you mention it. Only when I shake hands, though.î
ìHow about you, Arthur?î asked Max.
Arthur nodded once, his eyebrows climbing.
Max smiled and pounded fist into palm. ìWhy, itís a primitive sort of telepathy-too weak to work without physical contact and even then capable of delivering only a few simple ideas.î
ìBut why hair, dad?î asked Arthur.
ìMaybe itís our hair that attracted them in the first place. Theyíve never seen anything like it and-and-well, who can explain their psychology?î
He was down on his knees suddenly, splashing water over his high crest of hair. There was a frothing of water and a surging of green bodies as the Phibs pressed closer. One green paw passed gently through the stiff white crest, followed by excited, if noiseless, chattering. Struggling amongst themselves for favored vantage-points, they competed for the privilege of touching the hair until Max, for sheer weariness, was forced to rise again.
ìTheyíre probably our friends for life now,î he said. ìA pretty queer set of animals.î
It was Irene, then, who noticed the group of Phib? a hundred yards from shore. They paddled quietly, making no effort to approach closer, ìWhy donít they come?î she asked.
She turned to one of the foremost Phibs and pointed, making frantic gestures of dubious meaning. She received only solemn stares in return.
ìThatís not the way, Irene,î admonished Max, gently. He 229 held out his hand, grasped that of a willing Phib and stood motionless for a moment. When he loosed his grip, the Phib slid into the water and disappeared. In a moment, the laggard Phibs were approaching shore slowly.
ìHow did you do it?î gasped Irene.
ìTelepathy! I held on tightly and pictured an isolated group of Phibs and a long hand stretching out over the water to shake theirs.î He smiled gently, ìThey are quite intelligent, or they would not have understood so readily.î
ìWhy, theyíre females,î cried Arthur, in sudden breathless astonishment ìBy all thatís holy,-they suckle their young!î
The newcomers were slenderer and lighter in color than the others. They advanced shyly, urged on by the bolder males and held out timid hands in greeting.
ìOh-h,î Irene cried in sudden delight. ìLook at this!î
She was down on her knees in the mud, arms outstretched to the nearest female. The other three watched in fascinated silence as the nervous she-Phib clasped its tiny armful closer to its breast.
But Ireneís arms made little inviting gestures, ìPlease, please. Itís so cute. I wonít hurt him.î
Whether the Phib mother understood is doubtful, but with a sudden motion, she held out a little green bundle of squirming life and deposited it in the waiting arms.
Irene rose, squealing with delight. Little webbed feet kicked aimlessly and round frightened eyes stared at her. The other three crowded close and watched it curiously.
ìIts the dearest little thing, it is. Look at its funny little mouth. Do you want to hold it. Henry?î
Henry jumped backwards as if stung, ìNot on your life! Iíd probably drop it.î
ìDo you get any thought images, Irene?í asked Max, thoughtfully.
Irene considered and frowned her concentration, ìNo-o. Itís too young, mayb-oh, yes! Itís-itís-î She stopped, and tried to laugh. ìItís hungry! î
She returned the little baby Phib to its mother, whose muscular arms clasped the little mite close. The tiny Phib swiveled its little green head to bend one last goggling look at the creature that had held it for an instant.
ìFriendly creatures,î said Max, ìand intelligent. They can keep their lakes and rivers. Weíll take the land and wonít interfere with them.î
A lone Tweenie stood on Scanlon Ridge and his field-glass pointed at the Divide ten miles up the hills. For five minutes, the glass did not waver and the Tweenie stood like some watchful statue made of the same rock as formed the mountains all about.
And then the field-glass lowered, and the Tweenieís face was a pale thin-lipped picture of gloom. He hastened down the slope to the guarded, hidden entrance to Venustown.
He shot past the guards without a word and descended into the lower levels where solid rock was still being puffed into nothingness and shaped at will by controlled blasts of super-energy.
Arthur Scanlon looked up and with a sudden premonition of disaster, gestured the Disintegrators to a halt.
ìWhatís wrong, Sorrell?î
The Tweenie leant over and whispered a single word into Arthurís ear.
ìWhere?î Arthurís voice jerked out hoarsely.
ìOn the other side of the ridge. Theyíre coming through the Divide now in our direction. I spotted the blaze of sun on metal and-î he held up his field-glass significantly.
ìGood Lord!î Arthur rubbed his forehead distractedly and then turned to the anxiously-watching Tweenie at the controls of the Disinto. ìContinue as planned! No change!î
He hurried up the levels to the entrance, and snapped out hurried orders, ìTriple the guard immediately. No one but me or those with me, are to be permitted to leave. Send out men to round up any stragglers outside immediately and order them to keep within shelter and make no unnecessary sound.î
Then, back again through the central avenue to his fatherís quarters.
Max Scanlon looked up from his calculations and his grave forehead smoothed out slowly.
ìHello, son. Is anything wrong? Another resistant stratum?î
ìNo, nothing like that.î Arthur closed the door carefully and lowered his voice. ìEarthmen!î
For a moment. Max made no movement. The expression on his face froze for an instant, and then, with a sudden exhalation, he slumped in his chair and the lines in his forehead deepened wearily.
ìSettlers?î
ìLooks so. Sorrell said women and children were among them. There were several hundred in all, equipped for a stay-and headed in this direction.î
Max groaned, ìOh, the luck, the luck! All the vast empty spaces of Venus to choose and they come here. Come, letís get a firsthand look at this.î
They came through the Divide in a long, snaky line. Hard-bitten pioneers with their pinched work-worn women and their carefree, half-barbarous, wilderness-bred children. The low, broad ìVenus Vansî joggled clumsily over the untrodden ways, loaded down with amorphous masses of household necessities.
The leaders surveyed the prospect and one spoke in clipped, jerky syllables, ìAlmost through, Jem. Weíre out among the foothills now.î
And the other replied slowly, ìAnd thereís good new growing-land ahead. We can stake out farms and settle down.î He sighed, ìItís been tough going this last month. Iím glad itís over!î
And from a ridge ahead-the last ridge before the valley-the Scanlons, father and son, unseen dots in the distance, watched the newcomers with heavy hearts.
ìThe one thing we could not prepare for-and itís happened.î
Arthur spoke slowly and reluctantly, ìThey are few and unarmed. We can drive them out in an hour.î With sudden fierceness, ìVenus is ours!î
ìYes, we can drive them out in an hour-in ten minutes. But they would return, in thousands, and armed. Weíre not ready to fight all Earth, Arthur.î
The younger man bit his lip and words were muttered forth half in shame, ìFor the sake of the race. Father-we could kill them all.î
ìNever!î exclaimed Max, his old eyes flashing. ìWe will not be the first to strike. If we kill, we can expect no mercy from Earth; and we will deserve none,î
ìBut, father, what else? We can expect no mercy from Earth as it is. If weíre spotted,-if they ever suspect our existence, our whole hegira becomes pointless and we lose out at the very beginning.î
ìI know. I know.î
ìWe canít change now,î continued Arthur, passionately. ìWeíve spent months preparing Venustown. How could we start over?î
ìWe canít,î agreed Max, tonelessly. ìTo even attempt to move would mean sure discovery. We can only-î
ìLive like moles after all. Hunted fugitives! Frightened refugees! Is that it?î
ìPut it any way you like-but we must hide, Arthur, and bury ourselves.î
ìUntil-?î
ìUntil I-or we-perfect a curved two-dimensional statbeam. Surrounded by an impermeable defense, we can come out into the open. It may take years; it may take one week. I donít know.î
ìAnd every day we run the risk of detection. Any day the swarms of purebloods can come down upon us and wipe us out. Weíve got to hang by a hair day after day, week after week, month after month-î
ìWeíve got to.î Maxís mouth was clamped shut, and his eyes were a frosty blue.
Slowly, they went back to Venustown.
Things were quiet in Venustown, and eyes were turned to the top-most level and the hidden exits. Out there was air and the sun and space-and Earthmen.
They had settled several miles up the river-bed. Their rude houses were springing up. Surrounding land was being cleared. Farms were being staked out. Planting was taking place.
And in the bowels of Venus, eleven hundred Tweenies shaped their home and waited for an old man to track down the elusive equations that would enable a stat-ray to spread in two dimensions and curve.
Irene brooded somberly as she sat upon the rocky ledge and stared ahead to where the dim gray light indicated the existence of an exit to the open. Her shapely legs swung gently back and forth and Henry Scanlon, at her side, fought desperately to keep his gaze focussed harmlessly upon air.
ìYou know what. Henry?î
ìWhat?î
ìIíll bet the Phibs could help us.î
ìHelp us do what, Irene?î
ìHelp us get rid of the Earthmen.î
Henry thought it over carefully, ìWhat makes you think that?î
ìWell, theyíre pretty clever-cleverer than we think. Their minds are altogether different, though, and maybe they could fix it. Besides-Iíve just got a feeling.î She withdrew her hand suddenly, ìYou donít have to hold it. Henry.î
Henry swallowed, ìI-I thought you had a sort of unsteady seat there-might fall, you know.î
ìOh!î Irene looked down the terrific three-foot drop. ëThereís something in what you say. It does look pretty high here.î
Henry decided he was in the presence of a hint, and acted accordingly. There was a momentís silence while he seriously considered the possibility of her feeling a bit chilly-but before he had quite decided that she probably was, she spoke again,
ìWhat I was going to say, Henry, was this. Why donít we go out and see the Phibs?î
ìDad would take my head off if I tried anything like that.î
ìIt would be a lot of fun.î
ìSure, but itís dangerous. We canít risk anyone seeing us.î
Irene shrugged resignedly, ìWell, if youíre afraid, weíll say no more about it.î
Henry gasped and reddened. He was off the ledge in a bound, ìWhoís afraid? When do you want to go?î
ìRight now, Henry. Right this very minute.î Her cheeks flushed with enthusiasm.
ìAll right then. Come on.î He started off at a half-run, dragging her along.-And then a thought occurred to him and he stopped short.
He turned to her fiercely, ì Iíll show you if Iím afraid.î His arms were suddenly about her and her little cry of surprise was muffled effectively.
ìGoodness,î said Irene, when in a position to speak once more. ìHow thoroughly brutal! î
ìCertainly. Iím a very well-known brute,î gasped Henry, as he uncrossed his eyes and got rid of the swimming sensation in his head. ìNow letís get to those Phibs; and remind me, when Iím president, to put up a memorial to the fellow who invented kissing.î
Up through the rock-lined corridor, past the backs of outward-gazing sentries, out through the carefully camouflaged opening, and they were upon the surface.
The smudge of smoke on the southern horizon was grim evidence of the presence of man, and with that in mind, the two young Tweenies slithered through the underbrush into the forest and through the forest to the lake of the Phibs.
Whether in some strange way of their own the Phibs sensed the presence of friends, the two could not tell, but they had scarcely reached the banks when approaching dull-green smudges beneath water told of the creaturesí coming.
A wide, goggle-eyed head broke the surface, and, in a second, bobbing frogheads dotted the lake.
Henry wet his hand and seized the friendly forelimb outstretched to him.
ìHi there, Phib.î
The grinning mouth worked and made its soundless answer.
ìAsk him about the Earthmen, Henry,î urged Irene. Henry motioned impatiently.
ìWait a while. It takes time. Iím doing the best I can.î
For two slow minutes, the two, Tweenie and Phib, remained motionless and stared into each otherís eyes. And then the Phib broke away and, at some silent order, every lake-creature vanished, leaving the Tweenies alone.
Irene stared for a moment, nonplussed, ìWhat happened?î
Henry shrugged, ìI donít know. I pictured the Earthmen and he seemed to know who I meant. Then I pictured Earthmen fighting us and killing us-and he pictured a lot of us and only a few of them and another fight in which we killed them. But then I pictured us killing them and then a lot more of them coming-hordes and hordes-and killing us and then-î
But the girl was holding her hands to her tortured ears, ìOh, my goodness. No wonder the poor creature didnít understand. I wonder he didnít go crazy.î
ìWell, I did the best I could,î was the gloomy response. ìThis was all your nutty idea, anyway.î
Irene got no further with her retort than the opening syllable, for in a moment the lake was crowded with Phibs once more. ìTheyíve come back,î she said instead.
A Phib pushed forward and seized Henryís hand while the others crowded around in great excitement. There were several moments of silence and Irene fidgeted.
ìWell?î she said.
ìQuiet, please. I donít get it. Something about big animals, or monsters, or-î His voice trailed away, and the furrow between his eyes deepened into painful concentration.
He nodded, first abstractedly, then vigorously.
He broke away and seized Ireneís hands. ìIíve got it-and itís the perfect solution. We can save Venustown all by ourselves, Irene, with the help of the Phibs-if you want to come to the Lowlands with me tomorrow. We can take along a pair of Tonite pistols and food supplies and if we follow the river, it oughtnít to take us more than two or three days there and the same time back. What do you say, Irene?î
Youth is not noted for forethought. Ireneís hesitation was for effect only, ìWell-maybe we shouldnít go ourselves, but -but Iíll go-with you.î There was the lightest accent on the last word.
Ten seconds later, the two were on their way back to Venustown, and Henry was wondering, if on the whole, it werenít better to put up two memorials to the fellow who invented kissing.
The flickering red-yellow of the fire sent back ruddy highlights from Henryís lordly crest of hair and cast shifting shadows upon his brooding face.
It was hot in the Lowlands, and the fire made it worse, yet Henry huddled close and kept an anxious eye upon the sleeping form of Irene on the other side. The teeming life of the Venusian jungle respected fire, and the flames spelt safety.
They were three days from the plateau now. The stream had become a lukewarm, slowly-moving river, the shores of which were covered with the green scum of algae. The pleasant forests had given way to the tangled, vine-looped growths of the jungle. The mingled sounds of life had grown in volume and increased to a noisy crescendo. The air became warmer and damper; the ground swampier; the surroundings more fantastically unfamiliar.
And yet there was no real danger-of that, Henry was convinced. Poisonous life was unknown on Venus, and as for the tough-skinned monsters that lorded the jungles, the fire at night and the Phibs during day would keep them away.
Twice the ear-splitting shriek of a Centosaur had sounded in the distance and twice the sound of crashing trees had caused the two Tweenies to draw together in fear. Both times, ëI the monsters had moved away again. ï
This was the third night out, and Henry stirred uneasily. The Phibs seemed confident that before morning they could start their return trip, and somehow the thought of Venustown was rather attractive. Adventure and excitement are fine and with every passing hour the glory of his scintillating bravery grew in Ireneís eyes-which was wonderful-but still Venustown and the friendly Highlands were nice to think about.
He threw himself on his stomach and gazed morosely into the fire, thinking of his twenty years of age-almost twenty years.
ìWhy, heck,î he tore at the rank grass beneath. ìItís about time I was thinking of getting married .î And his eye strayed involuntarily to the sleeping form beyond the fire.
As if in response, there was a flickering of eyelids and a vague stare out of deep blue eyes.
Irene sat up and stretched.
ìI canít sleep at all,î she complained, brushing futilely at her white hair. ìItís so hotî She stared at the fire distastefully.
Henryís good humor persisted. ìYou slept for hours-and snored like a trombone.î
Ireneís eyes snapped wide open. ìI did not!î Then, with a voice vibrant with tragedy, ìDid I?î
ìNo, of course not!î Henry howled his laughter, stopping only at the sudden, sharp contact between the toe of Ireneís shoe and the pit of his own stomach. ìOuch,î he said.
ìDonít speak to me anymore. Mister Scanlon!î was the girlís frigid remark.
It was Henryís turn to look tragic. He rose in panicky dismay and took a single step towards the girl. And then he froze in his tracks at the ear-piercing shriek of a Centosaur. When he came to himself, he found his arms full of Irene.
Reddening, she disentangled herself, and then the Centosaurian shriek sounded again, from another direction,-and there she was, right back again.
Henryís face was pale, in spite of his fair armful. ìI think the Phibs have snared the Centosaurs. Come with me and Iíll ask them.î
The Phibs were dim blotches in the grey dawn that was breaking. Rows and rows of strained, abstracted individuals were all that met the eye. Only one seemed to be unoccupied and when Henry rose from the handclasp, he said, ìTheyíve got three Centosaurs and thatís all they can handle. Weíre starting back to the Highlands right now.î
The rising sun found the party two miles up the river. The Tweenies, hugging the shore, cast wary eyes towards the bordering jungle. Through an occasional clearing, vast grey bulks could be made out The noise of the reptilian shrieks was almost continuous.
ìIím sorry I brought you, Irene,î said Henry. ìIím not so sure now that the Phibs can take care of the monsters.î
Irene shook her head. ìThatís all right, Henry. I wanted to come. Only-I wish we had thought of letting the Phibs bring the beasts themselves. They donít need us.î
ìYes, they do! If a Centosaur gets out of control, it will make straight for the Tweenies and theyíd never get away. Weíve got the Tonite guns to kill the ësaurs with if the worst comes to the worst-î His voice trailed away and he glanced at the lethal weapon in his hand and derived but cold comfort therefrom.
The first night was sleepless for both Tweenies. Somewhere, unseen in the blackness of the river, Phibs took shifts and their telepathic control over the tiny brains of the gigantic, twenty-legged Centosaurs maintained its tenuous hold. Off in the jungle, three hundred-ton monsters howled impatiently against the force that drove them up the river side against their will and raved impotently against the unseen barrier that prevented them from approaching the stream.
By the side of the fire, a pair of Tweenies, lost between mountainous flesh on one side and the fragile protection of a telepathic web on the other, gazed longingly towards the Highlands some forty miles off.
Progress was slow. As the Phibs tired, the Centosaurs grew balkier. But gradually, the air grew cooler. The rank jungle growth thinned out and the distance to Venustown shortened.
Henry greeted the first signs of familiar temperate-zone forest with a tremulous sigh of relief. Only Ireneís presence prevented him from discarding his role of heroism.
He felt pitifully eager for their quixotic journey to be over, but he only said, ìItís practically all over but the shouting. And you can bet thereíll be shouting, Irene. Weíll be heroes, you and I.î
Ireneís attempt at enthusiasm was feeble. ìIím tired. Henry. Letís rest.î She sank slowly to the ground, and Henry, after signalling the Phibs, joined her.
ìHow much longer, Henry?î Almost without volition, she found her head nestling wearily against his shoulder.
ìOne more day, Irene. Tomorrow this time, weíll be back.î He looked wretched, ìYou think we shouldnít have tried to do this ourselves, donít you?î
ìWell, it seemed a good idea at the time.î
ìYes, I know,î said Henry. ìIíve noticed that I get lots of ideas that seem good at the time, but sometimes they turn sour.î He shook his head philosophically, ìI donít know why, but thatís the way it is.î
ìAll I know,î said Irene, ìis that I donít care if I never move another step in my life. I wouldnít get up now-î
Her voice died away as her beautiful blue eyes stared off towards the right. One of the Centosaurs stumbled into the waters of a small, tributary to the stream they were following. Wallowing in the water, his huge serpentine body mounted on the ten stocky pairs of legs, glistened horribly. His ugly head weaved towards the sky and his terrifying call pierced the air. A second joined him.
Irene was on her feet. ìWhat are you waiting for. Henry. Letís go! Hurry!î
Henry gripped his Tonite gun tightly and followed.
Arthur Scanlon gulped savagely at his fifth cup of black coffee and, with an effort, brought the Audiomitter into optical focus. His eyes, he decided, were becoming entirely too balky. He rubbed them into red-rimmed irritation and cast a glance over his shoulder at the restlessly sleeping figure on the couch.
He crept over to her, and adjusted the coverlet.
ìPoor Mom,î he whispered, and bent to kiss the pale lips.
He turned to the Audiomitter and clenched a fist at it, ìWait till I get you, you crazy nutî
Madeline stirred, ìIs it dark yet?î
ìNo,î lied Arthur with feeble cheerfulness. ìHell call before sundown. Mom. You just sleep and let me take care of things. Dadís upstairs working on the stat-field and he says heís making progress. In a few days everything will be all right.î He sat silently beside her and grasped her band tightly. Her tired eyes closed once more.
The signal light blinked on and, with a last look at his mother, he stepped out into the corridor, ìWell!î
The waiting Tweenie saluted smartly, ìJohn Barno wants to say that it looks as if we are in for a storm.î He handed over an official report.
Arthur glanced at it peevishly, ìWhat of that? Weíve had plenty so far, havenít we? What do you expect of Venus?î
ìThis will be a particularly bad one, from all indications. The barometer has fallen unprecedentedly. The ionic concentration of the upper atmosphere is at an unequalled maximum. The Beulah River has overflowed its banks and is rising rapidly.î
The other frowned, ìThereís not an entrance to Venustown that isnít at least fifty yards above river level. As for rain- our drainage system is to be relied upon.î He grimaced suddenly. ìGo back and tell Barno that it can storm for my part -for forty days and forty nights if it wants to. Maybe it will drive the Earthmen away.î
He turned away, but the Tweenie held his ground, ìBeg pardon sir, but thatís not the worst. A scouting party today-î
Arthur whirled. ìA scouting party? Who ordered one to be sent out?î
ìYour father, sir. They were to make contact with the Phibs,-I donít know why.î
ìWell, go on.î
ìSir, the Phibs could not be located.î
And now, for the first time, Arthur was startled out of his savage ill-humor, ëThey were gone?î
The Tweenie nodded, ìIt is thought that they have sought shelter from the coming storm. It is that which causes Barno to fear the worst.î
ìThey say rats desert a sinking ship,î murmured Arthur. He buried his head in trembling hands. ìGodi Everything at once! Everything at once!î
The darkening twilight hid the pall of blackness that lowered over the mountains ahead and emphasized the darting flashes of lightning that flickered on and off continuously.
Irene shivered, ìItís getting sort of windy and chilly, isnít it?î
ìThe cold wind from the mountains. Weíre in for a storm, I guess,î Henry assented absently. ìI think the river is getting wider.î
A short silence, and then, with sudden vivacity, ìBut look, Irene, only a few more miles to the lake and then weíre practically at the Earth village. Itís almost over.î
Irene nodded, ìIím glad for all of us-and the Phibs, too.î
She had reason for the last statement. The Phibs were swimming slowly now. An additional detachment had arrived the day before from upstream, but even with those reinforcements, progress had slowed to a walk. Unaccustomed cold was nipping the multi-legged reptiles and they yielded to superior mental force more and more reluctantly.
The first drops fell just after they had passed the lake. Darkness had fallen, and in the blue glare of the lightning the trees about them were ghostly specters reaching swaying fingers towards the sky. A sudden flare in the distance marked the funeral pyre of a lightning-hit tree.
Henry paled. ìMake for the clearing just ahead. At a time like this, trees are dangerous.î
The clearing he spoke of composed the outskirts of the Earth village. The rough-hewn houses, crude and small against the fury of the elements, showed lights here and there that spoke of human occupancy. And as the first Centosaur stumbled out from between splintered trees, the storm suddenly burst in all its fury.
The two Tweenies huddled close. ìItís up to the Phibs,î screamed Henry, dimly heard above the wind and rain. ìI hope they can do it.î
The three monsters converged upon the houses ahead. They moved more rapidly as the Phibs called up every last bit of mental power.
Irene buried her wet head in Henryís equally wet shoulder, ìI canít look! Those houses will go like matchsticks. Oh, the poor people!î
ìNo, Irene, no. Theyíve stopped!î
The Centosaurs pawed vicious gouges out of the ground beneath and their screams rang shrill and clear above the noise of the storm. Startled Earthmen rushed from their cabins.
Caught unprepared-most having been roused from sleep -and faced with a Venusian storm and nightmarish Venusian monsters, there was no question of organized action. As they stood, carrying nothing but their clothes, they broke and ran.
There was the utmost confusion. One or two, with dim attempts at presence of mind, took wild, ineffectual pot-shots at the mountains of flesh before them-and then ran.
And when it seemed that all were gone, the giant reptiles surged forward once more and where once had been houses, there were left only mashed splinters.
ìTheyíll never come back, Irene, theyíll never come back.î Henry was breathless at the success of his plan. ìWeíre heroes now, and-î His voice rose to a hoarse shriek, ìIrene, get back! Make for the trees!î
The Centosaurian howls had taken on a deeper note. The nearest one reared onto his two hindmost pairs of legs and his great head, two hundred feet above ground, was silhouetted horribly against the lightning. With a rumbling thud, he came down on all feet again and made for the river-which under the lash of the storm was now a raging flood.
The Phibs had lost control!
Henryís Tonite gun flashed into quick action as he shoved Irene away. She, however, backed away slowly and brought her own gun into line.
The ball of purple light that meant a hit blazed into being and the nearest Centosaur screamed in agony as its mighty tail threshed aside the surrounding trees. Blindly, the hole where once a leg had been gushing blood, it charged.
A second glare of purple and it was down with an earthshaking thud, its last shriek reaching a crescendo of shrill frightfulness.
But the other two monsters were crashing towards them. They blundered blindly towards the source of the power that, had held them captive almost a week; driving violently with all the force of their mindless hate to the river. And in the path of the Juggernauts were the two Tweenies.
The boiling torrent was at their backs. The forest was a groaning wilderness of splintered trees and ear-splitting sound.
Then, suddenly, the reports of Tonite guns sounded from the distance. Purple glares-a flurry of threshing-spasmodic shrieking-and then a silence in which even the wind, as if overawed by recent events, held its peace momentarily.
Henry yelled his glee and performed an impromptu war-dance. ìTheyíve come from Venustown, Irene,î he shouted. ëTheyíve got the Centosaurs and everythingís finished! Weíve saved the Tweenies!î
It happened in a breathís time. Irene had dropped her gun and sobbed her relief. She was running to Henry and then she tripped-and the river had her.
ìHenry!î The wind whipped the sound away.
For one dreadful moment. Henry found himself incapable of motion. He could only stare stupidly, unbelievingly, at the spot where Irene had been, and then he was in the water. He plunged into the surrounding blackness desperately.
ìIrene!î He caught his breath with difficulty. The current drove him on.
ì Irene! î No sound but the wind. His efforts at swimming were futile. He couldnít even break surface for more than a second at a time, his lungs were bursting.
ì Irene! î There was no answer. -Nothing but rushing water and darkness.
And then something touched him. He lashed out at it instinctively, but the grip tightened. He felt himself borne up into the air. His tortured lungs breathed in gasps. A grinning Phib face stared into his and after that there were nothing but confused impressions of cold, dark wetness.
He became aware of his surroundings by stages. First, that he was sitting on a blanket under the trees, with other blankets wrapped tightly about him. Then, he felt the warm radiation of the heatlamps upon him and the illumination of Atomo bulbs. People were crowding close and he noticed that it was no longer raining.
He stared about him hazily and then, ìIrene!î
She was beside him, as wrapped up as he, and smiling feebly, ìIím all right, Henry. The Phibs dragged me back, too.î
Madeline was bending over him and he swallowed the hot coffee placed to his lips. ìThe Phibs have told us of what you two have helped them do. Weíre all proud of you, son-you and Irene.î
Maxís smile transfigured his face into the picture of paternal pride, ìThe psychology you used was perfect. Venus is too vast and has too many friendly areas to expect Earthmen to return to places that have shown themselves to be infested with Centosaurs-not for a good long while. And when they do come back, we shall have our stat-field.î
Arthur Scanlon hurried up out of the gloom. He thwacked Henry on the shoulder and then wrung Ireneís hand. ìYour guardian and I,î he told her, ìare fixing up a celebration for day after tomorrow, so get good and rested. Itís going to be the greatest thing you ever saw.î
Henry spoke lip, ìCelebration, huh? Well, Iíll tell you what you can do. After itís over, you can announce an engagementî
ìAn engagement?î Madeline sat up and looked interested. ìWhat do you mean?î
ìAn engagement-to be married,î came the impatient answer. ìIím old enough, I suppose. Today proves it!î
Ireneís eyes bent in furious concentration upon the grass, ìWith whom. Henry?î
ìHuh? With you , of course. Gosh, who else could it be?î
ìBut you havenít asked me.î The words were uttered slowly and with great firmness.
For a moment Henry flushed, and then his jaws grew grim, ìWell, Iím not going to. Iím telling you! And what are you going to do about it?î
He leaned close to her and Max Scanlon chuckled and motioned the others away. On tip-toes, they left.
A dim shape hobbled into view and the two Tweenies separated in confusion. They had forgotten the others.
But it wasnít another Tweenie. ìWhy-why, itís a Phib!î cried Irene.
He limped his ungainly way across the wet grass, with the inexpert aid of his muscular arms. Approaching, he flopped wearily on his stomach and extended his forearms.
His purpose was plain. Irene and Henry grasped a hand apiece. There was silence a moment or two and the Phibís great eyes glinted solemnly in the light of the Atomo lamps. Then there was a sudden squeal of embarrassment from Irene and shy laugh from Henry. Contact was broken.
ìDid you get the same thing I did?î asked Henry.
Irene was red, ìYes, a long row of little baby Phibs, maybe fifteen-î
ìOr twenty,î said Henry.
ì- with long white hear! î



***



The story, not surprisingly, reflects my personal situation at the time. I had gone to a boysí high school and to a boysí college. Now that I was in graduate school, however, the surroundings were, for the first time, coeducational.
In the fall of 1939, I discovered that a beautiful blond girl had the desk next to mine in the laboratory of my course in synthetic organic chemistry. Naturally I was attracted.
I persuaded her to go out with me on simple dates, the very first being on my twentieth birthday, when I took her to Radio City Music Hall. For five months, I mooned after her with feckless, romanticism.
At the end of the school year, though, she had earned her master of arts degree and, having decided not to go on for her doctorate, left school and took a job in Wilmington, Delaware, leaving me behind, woebegone and stricken.
I got over it, of course, but while she was still at school I wrote ìHalf-Breeds on Venus.î Of all the stories I had yet written, it was the most heavily boy-and-girl. The heroineís name was Irene, which was the name of my pretty blond lab neighbor.
Merely having a few dates on the hand-holding level did not, however, perform the magic required to make me capable of handling passion in literature, and I continued to use girls sparingly in later stories-and a good thing, too, I think.
The success of ìHalf-Breeds on Venusî made the notion of writing sequels generally seem a good idea. A sequel to a successful story must, after all, be a reasonably sure sale. So even while I was working on ìHalf-Breeds on Venus,î I suggested to Campbell that I write a sequel to ìHomo Sol.î
Campbellís enthusiasm was moderate, but he was willing to look at such a sequel if I were to write it. I did write it as soon as ìHalf-Breeds on Venusî was done and called it ìThe Imaginary.î Although it used one of the chief characters of ìHomo Sol,î the human-nonhuman confrontation was absent, which probably didnít help it as far as Campbell was concerned. I submitted it to him on June 11, and received it back-a rejection, sequel or no sequel-on June 19.
Pohl rejected it, too. Tremaine read it with more sympathy and was thinking of taking it for Comet , I heard, but that magazine ceased publication and the story was back on the market. Actually, I retired it, but two years later I sold it to Pohlís magazine after all-but at a time when Pohl was no longer editor.
But though I had my troubles and didnít click every time, or even right away, I did manage to make $272 during my first year as a graduate student, and that was an enormous help.








The Imaginary


The telecaster flashed its fitful signal, while Tan Porus sat by complacently. His sharp, green eyes glittered their triumph, and his tiny body was vibrant with excitement. Nothing could have better indicated the greatness of the occasion than his extraordinary position-Tan Porus had his feet on the desk!
The ëcaster glowed into life and a broad Arcturian countenance frowned fretfully out at the Rigellian psychologist.
ìDo you have to drag me here straight from bed, Porus? Itís the middle of the night!î
ìItís broad daylight in this part of the world. Final. But Iíve got something to tell you thatíll make you forget all about sleep.î
Gar Final, editor of the J.G.P.- Journal of Galactic Psychology -allowed a look of alertness to cross his face. Whatever Tan Porusís faults-and Arcturus knew they were many -he had never issued a false alarm. If he said something great was in the air, it was not merely great-it was colossal!
It was quite evident that Porus was enjoying himself. ìFinal,î he said, ìthe next article I send to your rag is going to be the greatest thing youíve ever printed.î
Final was impressed. ìDo you really mean what you say?î he asked idiotically.
ìWhat kind of a stupid question is that? Of course I do. Listen-î There followed a dramatic silence, while the tenseness on Finalís face reached painful proportions. Then came Porusís husky whisper-îIíve solved the problem of the squid!î
Of course the reaction was exactly what Porus had expected. There was a blow-up at the other end, and for thirty interesting seconds the Rigellian was surprised to learn that the staid and respectable Final had a blistering vocabulary.
Porusís squid was a by-word throughout the galaxy. For two years now, he had been fussing over an obscure Draconian animal that persisted in going to sleep when it wasnít supposed to. He had set up equations and torn them down with a regularity that had become a standing joke with every psychologist in the Federation-and none had explained the unusual reaction. Now Final had been dragged from bed to be told that the solution had been reached-and that was all.
Final ripped out a concluding phrase that all but put the ëcaster out of commission.
Porus waited for the storm to pass and then said calmly, ìBut do you know how I solved it?î
The otherís answer was an indistinct mumble.
The Rigellian began speaking rapidly. All traces of amusement had left his face and, after a few sentences, all traces of anger left Finalís.
The Arcturianís expression became one of wide-eyed interest. ìNo?î he gasped.
ìYes!î
When Porus had finished. Final raced madly to put in rush calls to the printers to delay publication of the coming issue of the J.G.P. for two weeks.
Furo Santins, head of the math department of the University of Arcturus, gazed long and steady at his Sirian colleague.
ìNo, no, youíre wrong! His equations were legitimate. I checked them myself.î
ìMathematically, yes,î retorted the round-faced Sirian. ìBut psychologically they had no meaning.î
Santins slapped his high forehead. ìMeaning! Listen to the mathematician talk. Great space, man, what have mathematics to do with meaning? Mathematics is a tool and as long as it can be manipulated to give proper answers and to make correct predictions, actual meaning has no significance. Iíll say this for Tan Porus-most psychologists donít know enough mathematics to handle a slide-rule efficiently, but he knows his stuff.î
The other nodded doubtfully, ìI guess so. I guess so. But using imaginary quantities in psychological equations stretches my faith in science just a little bit. Square root of minus one!î
He shudderedÖ
The seniorsí lounge in Psychology Hall was crowded and a-buzz with activity. The rumor of Porusís solution to the now-classic problem of the squid had spread fast, and conversation touched on nothing else.
At the center of the thickest group was Lor Haridin. He was young, with but newly acquired Senior status. But as Porusís assistant he was, under present conditions, master of the situation.
ìLook, fellows-just exactly what itís all about I donít know. Thatís the old manís secret. All I can tell you is that Iíve got the general idea as to how he solved it.î
The others squeezed closer. ìI hear he had to make up a new mathematical notation for the squid,î said one, ìlike that time we had trouble with the humanoids of Sol.î
Lor Haridin shook his head. ìWorse! What made him think of it, I canít imagine. It was either a brainstorm or a nightmare, but anyway he introduced imaginary quantities-the square root of minus one.î
There was an awful silence and then someone said, ìI donít believe it!î
ìFact!î was the complacent reply.
ìBut it doesnít make sense. What can the square root of minus one represent, psychologically speaking? Why, that would mean-î he was doing rapid calculation in his head, as were most of the others-îthat the neural synapses were hooked up in neither more nor less than four dimensions!î
ìSure,î broke in another. ìI suppose that if you stimulate the squid today, it will react yesterday. Thatís what an imaginary would mean. Comet gas! Thatís what I say.î
ìThatís why youíre not the man Tan Porus is,î said Haridin. ìDo you suppose he cares how many imaginaries there are in the intermediate steps if they all square out into minus one in the final solution. All heís interested in is that they give him the proper sign in the answer-an answer which will explain that sleep business. As for its physical significance, what matter? Mathematics is only a tool, anyway.î
The others considered silently and marveled.
Tan Porus sat in his stateroom aboard the newest and most luxurious interstellar liner and gazed at the young man before him happily. He was in amazing good humor and, for perhaps the first time in his life, did not mind being interviewed by the keen, efficient employees of the Ether Press.
The Ethereporter on his side wondered in silence at the affability of the scientist. From bitter experience, he had found out that scientists, as a whole, detested reporters-and that psychologists, in particular, thought it fun to practice a bit of applied psych on them and to induce killingly amusing -to others-reactions.
He remembered the time that the old fellow from Canopus had convinced him that arboreal life was the greatest good. It had taken twenty men to drag him down from the tree-tops and an expert psychologist to bring him back to normal.
But here was the greatest of them all. Tan Porus, actually answering questions like a normal human being.
ìWhat I would like to know now, Professor,î said the reporter, ìis just what this imaginary quantity is all about. That is,î he interposed hastily, ìnot the mathematics of it-weíll take your word on that-but just a general idea that the ordinary humanoid can picture. For instance, Iíve heard that the squid has a four-dimensional mind.î
Porus groaned, ìOh, Rigel! Four-dimensional poppycock! To tell the honest truth, that imaginary I used-which seems to have caught the popular fancy-probably indicates nothing more than some abnormality in the squidís nervous system, but just what, I donít know. Certainly, to the gross methods of ecology and micro-physiology, nothing unusual has been found. No doubt, the answer would lie in the atomic physics of the creatureís brain, but there I have no hope.î There was a trace of disdain in his voice. ìThe atomic physicists are too far behind the psychologists to expect them to catch up at this late date.î
The reporter bore down furiously on his stylus. The next dayís headline was clear in his mind: Noted Psychologist Blasts Atomic Physicists!
Also, the headline of the day after: Indignant Physicists Denounce Noted Psychologist!
Scientific feuds were great stuff for the Ether Press, particularly that between psychologists and physicists, who, it was well known, hated each otherís guts.
The reporter glanced up brightly. ìSay, Professor, the humanoids of the galaxy are very interested, you know, in the private lives of you scientists. I hope you donít mind if I ask you a few questions about your trip home to Rigel IV.î
ìGo ahead,î said Porus, genially. ìTell them itís the first time Iím getting home in two years. Iím sort of looking forward to it. Arcturus is just a bit too yellow for my eyes and the furniture you have here is too big.î
ìItís true, isnít it, that you have a wife at home?î
Porus coughed. ìHmm, yes. Sweetest little woman in the galaxy. Iím looking forward to seeing her, too. Put that down.î
The reporter put it down. ìHow is it you didnít bring her to Arcturus with you?î
Some of the geniality left the Rigellianís face. ìI like to be alone when I work. Women are all right-in their place. Besides, my idea of a vacation is one by myself. Donít put that down.î
The reporter didnít put it down. He gazed at the otherís little form with open admiration. ìSay, Prof, how did you ever get her to stay home, though? I wish youíd tell me the secretî Then, with a wealth of feeling he added, ìI could use it!î
Porus laughed. ìI tell you, son. When youíre an ace psychologist, youíre master in your own home!î
He motioned the interview to an end and then suddenly grasped the other by the arm. His green eyes were piercingly sharp. ìAnd listen, son, that last remark doesnít go into the story, you know.î
The reporter paled and backed away. ìNo, sir; no sir! Weíve got a little saying in our profession that goes: ëNever monkey around with a psychologist, or heíll make a monkey of you .íì
ìGood! I can do it literally, you know, if I have to.î
The young press employee ducked out hastily after that, wiped the cold perspiration from his brow and left with his story. For a moment, towards the last, he had felt himself hanging on the ragged edge. He made a mental note to refuse all future interviews with psychologists-unless they raised his pay.
Tens of billions of miles out, the pure white orb of Rigel had reached Porusís eyes, and something in his heart uplifted him.
Type B reaction-nostalgia; conditioned reflex through association of Rigel with happy scenes of youth-
Words, phrases, equations spun through his keen brain, but he was happy in spite of them. And in a little while, the human triumphed over the psychologist and Porus abandoned analysis for the superior joy of uncritical happiness.
He sat up past the middle of the sleep period two nights before the landing to catch first glimpse of Hanlon, fourth planet of Rigel, his home world. Some place on that world, on the shores of a quiet sea, was a little two-story house. A little house-not those giant structures fit only for Arcturians and other hulking humanoids.
It was the summer season now and the houses would be bathed in the pearly light of Rigel, and after the harsh yellow-red of Arcturus, how restful that would be.
And-he almost shouted in his joy-the very first night he was going to insist on gorging himself with broiled tryptex . He hadnít tasted it for two years, and his wife was the best hand at tryptex in the system.
He winced a little at the thought of his wife. It had been a dirty trick, getting her to stay home the last two years, but it had had to be done. He glanced over the papers before him once more. There was just a little nervousness in his fingers as they shuffled the sheets. He had spent a full day in calculating her reactions at first seeing him after two yearsí absence and they were not pleasant
Nina Porus was a woman of untamed emotions, and he would have to work quickly and efficiently.
He spotted her quickly in the crowd. He smiled. It was nice to see her, even if his equations did predict long and serious storms. He ran over his initial speech once more and made a last-minute change.
And then she saw him. She waved frantically and broke from the forefront of the crowd. She was on Tan Porus before he was aware of it and, in the grip of her affectionate embrace, he went limp with surprise.
That wasnít the reaction to be expected at all! Something was wrong!
She was leading him dexterously through the crowd of reporters to the waiting stratocar, talking rapidly along the way.
ìTan Porus, I thought Iíd never live to see you again. Itís so good to have you with me again; you have absolutely no idea. Everything here at home is just fine, of course, but it isnít quite the same without you.î
Porusís green eyes were glazed. This speech was entirely uncharacteristic of Nina. To the sensitive ears of a psychologist, it sounded little short of the ravings of a maniac. He had not even the presence of mind to grunt at proper intervals. Frozen mutely in his seat, he watched the ground rush downwards and heard the air shriek backwards as they headed for their little house by the sea.
Nina Porus prattled on gaily-the one normal aspect of her conversation being her ability to uphold both ends of a dialogue with smooth efficiency.
ìAnd, of course, dear, Iíve fixed up an entire tryptex , broiled to a turn, garnished with sarnees . And, oh yes, about that affair last year with that new planet-Earth, do you call it? I was so proud of you when I heard about it. I said-î
And so on and on, until her voice degenerated into a meaningless conglomeration of sounds.
Where were her tears? Where were the reproaches, the threats, the impassioned self-pity?
Tan Porus roused himself to one great effort at dinner. He stared at the steaming dish of tryptex before him with an odd lack of appetite and said, ìThis reminds me of the time at Arcturus when I dined with the President Delegate-î
He went into details, dilating on the gayety and abandon of the affair, waxing lyrical over his own enjoyment of it, stressing, almost unsubtly, the fact that he had not missed his wife, and finally, in one last wild burst of desperation, mentioning casually the presence of a surprising number of Rigellian females in the Arcturian system.
And through it all, his wife sat smiling. ìWonderful, darling,î sheíd say. ìIím so glad you enjoyed yourself. Eat your tryptex .î
But Porus did not eat his tryptex . The mere thought of food nauseated him. With one lingering stare of dismay at his wife, he arose with what dignity he could muster and left for the privacy of his room.
He tore up the equations furiously and hurled himself into a chair. He seethed with anger, for evidently something had gone wrong with Nina. Terribly wrong! Even interest in another man-and for just a moment that had occurred to him as a possible explanation-would not cause such a revolution in character.
He tore at his hair. There was some hidden factor more startling than that-but what it was he had no idea. At that moment Tan Porus would have given the sum total of his worldly possessions to have his wife enter and make one-just one-attempt to snatch his scalp off, as of old.
And below, in the dining room, Nina Porus allowed a crafty gleam to enter her eye.
Lor Haridin put down his pen and said, ìCome in!î
The door opened, and his friend, Eblo Ranin, entered, brushed off a corner of the desk and sat down.
ìHaridin, Iíve got an idea.î His voice was uncommonly like a guilty whisper.
Haridin gazed at him suspiciously.
ìLike the time,î he said, ìyou set up the booby trap for old man Obel?î
Ranin shuddered. He had spent two days hiding in the ventilator shaft after that brilliant piece of work. ìNo, this is legitimate. Listen, Porus left you in charge of the squid, didnít he?î
ìOh, I see what youíre getting at. Itís no go. I can feed the squid, but thatís all. If I as much as clapped my hands at it to induce a color-change tropism, the boss would throw a fit.î
ìTo space with him! Heís parsecs away, anyway.î Ranin drew forth a two-month old copy of the J.G.P. and folded the cover back. ìHave you been following Livellís experiments at Procyon U.? You know-magnetic fields applied with and without ultra-violet radiation.î
ìOut of my field,î grunted Haridin. ìIíve beard of it, but thatís all. What about it?î
ìWell, itís a type E reaction which gives, believe it or not, a strong Fimbal Effect in practically every case, especially in the higher invertebrates.î
ìHmm!î
ìNow, if we could try it on this squid, we could-î
ìNo, no, no, no!î Haridin shook his head violently. ìPorus would break me. Great stars and little meteors, how he would break me!î
ìListen, you nut-Porus canít tell you what to do with the squid. Itís Frian Obel that has final say. Heís head of the Psychological Board, not Porus. All you have to do is to apply for his permission and youíll get it. Just between us, since that Homo Sol affair last year, he canít stand the sight of Porus anyway.î
Haridin weakened. ìYou ask him.î
Ranin coughed. ìNo. On the whole, perhaps Iíd better not. Heís sort of got a suspicion that I set that booby trap, and Iíd rather keep out of his way.î
ìHmm. Well-all right!î
Lor Haridin looked as if he had not slept well for a week -which shows that sometimes appearances are not deceiving. Eblo Ranin regarded him with patient kindliness and sighed.
ìLook! Will you please sit down? Santin said he would have the final results in today, didnít he?î
ìI know, I know, but itís humiliating. I spent seven years on higher math. And now I make a stupid mistake and canít even find it!î
ìMaybe itís not there to find.î
ìDonít be silly. The answer is just impossible. It must be impossible. It must be.î His high forehead creased. ìOh, I donít know what to think.î
He continued his concentrated attempt to wear out the nap of the rug beneath and mused bitterly. Suddenly he sat down.
ìItís those time integrals. You canít work with them, I tell you. You look ëem up in a table, taking half an hour to find the proper entry, and they give you seventeen possible answers. You have to pick the one that makes sense, and- Arcturus help me!-either they all do, or none do! Run up against eight of them, as we do in this problem, and weíve got enough permutations to last us the rest of our life. Wrong answer! Itís a wonder I lived through it at all.î
The look he gave the fat volume of Heloís Tables of Time Integrals did not sear the binding, to Raninís great surprise.
The signal light flashed, and Haridin leaped to the door.
He snatched the package from the messengerís hand and ripped open the wrappings frantically.
He turned to the last page and stared at Santinís final note:
Your calculations are correct. Congratulations- and wonít this knock Porusís head right off his shoulders! Better get in touch with him at once.
Ranin read it over the otherís shoulder, and for one long minute the two gazed at each other.
ìI was right,î whispered Haridin, eyes bulging. ìWeíve found something in which the imaginary doesnít square out. Weíve got a predicted reaction which includes an imaginary quantity!î
The other swallowed and brushed aside his stupefaction with an effort. ìHow do you interpret it?î
ìGreat space! How in the galaxy should I know? Weíve got to get Porus, thatís all.î
Ranin snapped his fingers and grabbed the other by the shoulders. ìOh, no, we wonít. This is our big chance. If we can carry this through, weíre made for life.î He shuttered in his excitement. ìArcturus! Any psychologist would sell his life twice over to have our opportunity right now.î
The Draconian squid crawled placidly about, unawed by the huge solenoid that surrounded its tank. The mass of tangled wires, the current leads, the mercury-vapor lamp up above meant nothing to it. It nibbled contentedly at the fronds of the sea fern about it, and was at peace with the world.
Not so the two young psychologists. Eblo Ranin scurried through the complicated set-up in a last-minute effort at checking everything. Lor Haridin helped him in intervals between nail-biting.
ìEverythingís set,î said Ranin, and swabbed wearily at his damp brow. ìLet her shoot!î
The mercury-vapor lamp went on and Haridin pulled the window curtains together. In the cold red-less light, two green-tinted faces watched the squid closely. It stirred restlessly, its warm pink changing to a dull black in the mercury light
ìTurn on the juice,î said Haridin hoarsely.
There was a soft click, and that was all.
ìNo reaction?î questioned Ranin, half to himself. And then: he held his breath as the other bent closer.
ìSomethingís happening to the squid. It seems to glow a bit -or is it my eyes?î
The glow became perceptible and then seemed to detach itself from the body of the animal and take on a spherical shape of itself. Long minutes passed.
ìItís emitting some sort of radiation, field, force-whatever you want to call it-and there seems to be expansion with time.î
There was no answer, and none was expected. Again they waited and watched.
And then Ranin emitted a muffled cry and grasped Haridinís elbow tightly. ìCrackling comets, whatís it doing?î
The globular glowing sphere of whatever it was had thrust out a pseudopod. A gleaming little projection touched the swaying branch of the sea-fern, and where it touched the leaves turned brown and withered!
ìShut off the current!î
The current clicked off; the mercury-vapor lamp went out; the shades were parted and the two stared at each other nervously.
ìWhat was it?î
Haridin shook his head. ìI donít know. It was something definitely insane. I never saw anything like itî
ìYou never saw an imaginary in a reaction equation before, either, did you? As a matter of fact, I donít think that expanding field was any known form of energy at-î
His breath came out in one long whistling exhalation and he retreated slowly from the tank containing the squid. The mollusc was motionless, but around it half the fern. in the tank hung sere and withered.
Haridin gasped. He pulled the shades and in the gloom, the globe of glowing haze bulked through half the tank. Little curving tentacles of light reached toward the remaining fem and one pulsing thread extended through the glass and was creeping along the table.
That fright in Raninís voice rendered it a cracked, scarcely-understood sound.
ìItís a lag reaction. Didnít you test it by Wilbonís Theorem?î
ìHow could I?î The otherís heart pumped madly and his dry lips fought to form words. ìWilbonís Theorem didnít make sense with an imaginary in the equation. I let it go.î
Ranin sped into action with feverish energy. He left the room and was back in a moment with a tiny, squealing, squirrel-like animal from his own lab. He dropped it in the path of the thread of light stealing along the table, and held it there with a yard rule.
The glowing thread wavered, seemed to sense the presence of life in some horribly blind way, and lunged towards it The little rodent squealed once, a high-pitched shriek of infinite torture, and went limp. In two seconds it was a shriveled, shrunken travesty of its former self.
Ranin swore and dropped the rule with a sudden yell, for the thread, of light-a bit brighter, a bit thicker-began creeping up the wood toward him.
ìHere,î said Haridin, ìletís end this!î He yanked a drawer open and withdrew the chromium-plated Tonite gun within. Its sharp thin beam of purple light lunged forward towards the squid and exploded in blazing, soundless fury against the edge of the sphere of force. The psychologist shot again and again, and then compressed the trigger to form one continuous purple stream of destruction that ceased only when power failed.
And the glowing sphere remained unharmed. It engulfed the entire tank. The ferns were brown masses of death.
ìGet the Board,î yelled Ranin. ìItís beyond us entirely!î
There was no confusion-humanoids in the mass are simply not subject to panic, if you donít count the half-genius, half-humanoid inhabitants of the planets of Sol-and the evacuation of the University grounds was carried out smoothly.
ìOne fool,î said old Mir Deana, ace physicist of Arcturus U., ìcan ask more questions than a thousand wise men can answer.î He fingered his scraggly beard and his button nose sniffed loudly in disdain.
ìWhat do you mean by that?î questioned Frian Obel sharply. His green Vegan skin darkened angrily.
ìJust that, by analogy, one cosmic fool of a psychologist can make a bigger mess than a thousand physicists can clear up.î
Obel drew in his breath dangerously. He had his own opinion of Haridin and Ranin, but no lame-brain physicist could-
The plump figure of Qual Wynn, university president, came charging down upon them. He was out of breath and spoke between puffs.
ìIíve gotten in touch with the Galactic Congress and theyíre arranging for evacuation of all Eron, if necessary.î His voice became pleading. ìIsnít there anything that can be done?íí
Mir Deana sighed, ìNothing-yet! All we know is this: the squid is emitting some sort of pseudo-living radiatory field which is not electromagnetic in character. Its advance cannot be stopped by anything we have yet tried, material or vacuum. None of our weapons affect it, for within the field the ordinary attributes of space-time apparently donít hold.î
The president shook a worried head. ìBad, bad! Youíve sent for Porus, though?î He sounded as though we were clutching at a last straw.
ìYes,î scowled Frian Obel. ìHeís the only one that really knows that squid. If he canít help us, no one can.î He stared off toward the gleaming white of the university buildings, where the grass over half the campus was brown stubble and the trees blasted ruins.
ìDo you think,î said the president, turning to Deana once more, ìthat the field can span interplanetary space?î
ìSizzling novae, I donít know what to think!î Deana exploded, and he turned pettishly away.
There was a thick silence of utter gloom.
Tan Porus was sunk in deep apathy. He was unaware of the brilliant coruscations of color overhead. He didnít hear a sound of the melodious tones that filled the auditorium.
He knew only one thing-that he had been talked into attending a concert. Concerts above all were anathema to him, and in twenty years of married life he had steered clear of them with a skill and ease that only the greatest psychologist of them all could have shown. And now-
He was startled out of his stupor by the sudden discordant sounds that arose from the rear.
There was a rush of ushers to the exit where the disturbance originated, a waving of protesting uniformed arms and then a strident voice: ìI am here on urgent business direct from the Galactic Congress on Eron, Arcturus. Is Tan Porus in the audience?î
Tan Porus was out of his seat with a bound. Any excuse to leave the auditorium was nothing short of heaven-sent.
He ripped open the communication handed him by the messenger and devoured its contents. At the second sentence, his elation left him. When he was finished, he raised a face in which only his darting green eyes seemed alive.
ìHow soon can we leave?î
ìThe ship is waiting now.î
ìCome, then.î
He took one step forward and stopped. There was a hand on his elbow.
ìWhere are you going?î asked Nina Porus. There was hidden steel in her voice.
Tan Porus felt stifled for a moment. He foresaw what would happen. ìDarling, I must go to Eron immediately. The fate of a world, of the whole galaxy perhaps, is at stake. You donít know how important it is. I tell you-î
ìAll right, go! And Iíll go with you.î
The psychologist bowed his head.
ìYes, dear!î he said. He sighed.
The psychological board hemmed and hawed as one man and then stared dubiously at the large-scale graph before them.
ìFrankly, gentlemen,î said Tan Porus, ìI donít feel too certain about it myself, but-well, youíve all seen my results, and checked them too. And it is the only stimulus that will yield a canceling reaction.î
Frian Obel fingered his chin nervously. ìYes, the mathematics is clear. Increase in hydrogen-ion activity past pH3 would set up a Demaneís Integral and that- But listen, Porus, weíre not dealing with space-time. The math might not hold -perhaps nothing will hold.î
ìItís our only chance. If we were dealing with normal space-time, we could just dump in enough acid to kill the blasted squid or fry it with a Tonite. As it is, we have no choice but to take our chances with-î
Loud voices interrupted him. ìLet me through, I say! I donít care if there are ten conferences going on!î
The door swung open and Qual Wynnís portly figure made its entrance. He spied Porus and bore down upon him. ìPorus, I tell you Iím going crazy. Parliament is holding me, as university president, responsible for all this, and now Deana says that-î He sputtered into silence and Mir Deana, standing composedly behind him, took up the tale.
ìThe field now covers better than one thousand square miles and its rate of increase is growing steadily. There seems to do no doubt now that it can span interplanetary space if it wishes to do so-interstellar as well, if given the time.î
ìYou hear that? You hear that?î Wynn was fairly dancing in his anxiety. ìCanít you do something? The galaxy is doomed, I tell you, doomed!î
ìOh, keep your tunic on,î groaned Porus, ìand let us handle this.î He turned to Deana. ìDidnít your physicist stooges conduct some clumsy investigations as to the speed of penetration of the field through various substances?î
Deana nodded stiffly.
ìPenetration varies, in general, inversely with density. Osmium, iridium and platinum are the best. Lead and gold are fair.î
ìGood! That checks! What Iíll need then is an osmium-plated suit with a lead-glass helmet. And make both plating and helmet good and thick.î
Qual Wynn stared horrified. ìOsmium plating! Osmium! By the great nebula, think of the expense.î
ìIím thinking,î said Porus frostilyÖ
ìBut theyíll charge it to the university; theyíll-î He recovered with difficulty as the somber stares of the assembled psychologists fastened themselves upon him. ìWhen do you need it?î he muttered weakly.
ìYouíre really going, yourself?î
ìWhy not?î asked Porus, clambering out of the suit.
Mir Deana said, ìThe lead-glass headpiece will hold off the field not longer than an hour and youíll probably be getting partial penetration in much shorter time. I donít know if you can do it.î
ì Iíll worry about that.î He paused, and then continued uncertainly. ìIíll be ready in a few minutes. Iíd like to speak to my wife first-alone.î
The interview was a short one. It was one of the very few occasions that Tan Porus forgot that he was a psychologist, and spoke as his heart moved him, without stopping to consider the natural reaction of the one spoken to.
One thing he did know-by instinct rather than thought- and that was that his wife would not break down or go sentimental on him; and there he was right. It was only in the last few seconds that her eyes fell and her voice quavered. She tugged a handkerchief from her wide sleeve and hurried from the room.
The psychologist stared after her and then stooped to pick up the thin book that had fallen as she had removed the handkerchief. Without looking at it, he placed it in the inner pocket of his tunic.
He smiled crookedly. ìA talisman!î he said.
Tan Porusís gleaming one-man cruiser whistled into the ìdeath field.î The clammy sensation of desolation impressed itself upon him at once.
He shrugged. ìImagination! Mustnít get nervy now.î
There was the vaguest glitter-a sparkle that was felt rather than seen-in the air about him. And then it invaded the ship itself, and, looking up, the Rigellian saw the five Eronian ricebirds he had brought with him lying dead on the floor of their cage, huddled masses of bedraggled feathers.
ìThe ëdeath fieldí is in,î he whispered. It had penetrated the steel hull of the cruiser.
The cruiser bumped to a rather unskillful landing on the broad university athletic field, and Tan Porus, an incongruous figure in the bulky osmium suit, stepped out. He surveyed his depressing surroundings. From the brown stubble underfoot to the glimmering haze that hid the normal blue of the sky, all seemed-dead.
He entered Psychology Hall.
His lab was dark; the shades were still drawn. He parted them and studied the squidís tank. The water replenisher was still working, for the tank was full. However, that was the only normal thing about it. Only a few dark-brown, ragged strands of rot were left of what had once been sea-fern. The squid itself lay inertly upon the floor of the tank.
Tan Porus sighed. He felt tired and numbed. His mind was hazy and unclear. For long minutes he stared about him unseeingly.
Then, with an effort, he raised the bottle he held and glanced at the label-12 molar hydrochloric acid.
He mumbled vaguely to himself. ìTwo hundred cc. Just dump the whole thing in. Thatíll force the pH down-if only hydrogen ion activity means something here.î
He was fumbling with the glass stopper, and-suddenly- laughing. He had felt exactly like this the one and only time he had ever been drunk.
He shook the gathering cobwebs from his brain. ìOnly got a few minutes to do-to do what? I donít know-something anyway. Dump this thing in. Dump it in. Dump! Dump! Dumpety-dump!î He was mumbling a silly popular song to himself as the acid gurgled its way into the open tank.
Tan Porus felt pleased with himself and he laughed. He stirred the water with his mailed fist and laughed some more. He was still singing that song.
And then he became aware of a subtle change in environment He fumbled for it and stopped singing. And then it hit him with the suddenness of a downpour of cold water. The glitter in the atmosphere had gone!
With a sudden motion, he unclasped the helmet and cast it off. He drew in long breaths of air, a bit musty, but unkilling.
He had acidified the water of the tank, and destroyed the field at its source. Chalk up another victory for the pure mathematics of psychology!
He stepped out of his osmium suit and stretched. The pressure on his chest reminded him of something. Withdrawing the booklet his wife had dropped, he said, ìThe talisman came through!î and smiled indulgently at his own whimsy.
The smile froze as he saw for the first time the title upon the book.
The title was Intermediate Course in Applied Psychology- Volume 5 .
It was as if something large and heavy had suddenly fallen onto Porusís head and driven understanding into it Nina had been boning up on applied psych for two whole years .
This was the missing factor. He could allow for it. He would have to use triple time integrals, but-
He threw the communicator switch and waited for contact
ìHello! This is Porus! Come on in, all of you! The death field is gone! Iíve beaten the squid.î He broke contact and added triumphantly, ì-and my wife!î
Strangely enough-or, perhaps, not so strangely-it was the latter feat that pleased him more.



***



The chief interest to me in ìThe Imaginaryî is that it foreshadows the ìpsychohistoryî that was to play such a big role in the ìFoundationî series. It was in this story and in its predecessor, ìHomo Sol,î that for the first time I treated psychology as a mathematically refined science.
It was about time that I made another stab at Unknown , and I did so with a story called ìThe Oak,î which, as I recall, was something about an oak tree that served as an oracle and delivered ambiguous statements. I submitted it to Campbell on July 16, 1940, and it was promptly rejected.
One of the bad things about writing for Unknown was that the magazine was one of a kind. If Unknown rejected a story, there was no place else to submit it. It was possible to try Weird Tales , a magazine that was older than any science fiction magazine, but it dealt with old-fashioned, creaky horror tales and paid very little to boot. I wasnít really interested in trying to get into it. (And besides, they rejected both ìLife Before Birthî and ìThe Oakî when I submitted them.)
Still, July 29, 1940, was a turning point in my career, although, of course, I had no way of telling it. I had up to that point written twenty-two stories in twenty-five months. Of these I had sold (or was to sell) thirteen, while nine never sold at all and no longer exist. The record wasnít abysmal but neither was it great-letís call it mediocre.
However, as it happened, except for two short-short stories that were special cases, I never again wrote a science fiction story I could not sell. I had found the range.
But not Campbellís range particularly. In August I wrote ìHeredity,î which I submitted to Campbell on August 15, and which he rejected two weeks later. Fortunately, Pohl snapped it up at once.








Heredity


Dr. Stefansson fondled the thick sheaf of typewritten papers that lay before him, ìItís all here, Harvey-twenty-five years of work.î
Mild-mannered Professor Harvey puffed idly at his pipe, ìWell, your part is over-and Markeyís, too, on Ganymede. Itís up to the twins, themselves, now.î
A short ruminative silence, and then Dr. Stefansson stirred uneasily, ìAre you going to break the news to Allen soon?î
The other nodded quietly, ìIt will have to be done before we get to Mars, and the sooner the better.î He paused, then added in a tightened voice, ìI wonder how it feels to find out after twenty-five years that one has a twin brother whom one has never seen. It must be a damned shock.î
ìHow did George take it?î
ìDidnít believe it at first, and I donít blame him. Markey had to work like a horse to convince him it wasnít a hoax. I suppose Iíll have as hard a job with Allen.î He knocked the dottle from his pipe and shook his head.
ìI have half a mind to go to Mars just to see those two get together,î remarked Dr. Stefansson wistfully. ìYouíll do no such thing, Stef. This experimentís taken too long and means too much to have you rum it by any such fool move.î
ìI know, I know! Heredity versus environment! Perhaps at last the definite answer.î He spoke half to himself, as if repeating an old, familiar formula, ìTwo identical twins, separated at birth; one brought up on old, civilized Earth, the other on pioneer Ganymede. Then, on their twenty-fifth birthday brought together for the first time on Mars-God! I wish Carter had lived to see the end of it Theyíre his children.î
ìToo bad!-But weíre alive, and the twins. To carry the experiment to its end will be our tribute to him.î
There is no way of telling, at first seeing the Martian branch of Medicinal Products, Inc., that it is surrounded by anything but desert. You canít see the vast underground caverns where the native fungi of Mars are artificially nurtured into huge blooming fields. The intricate transportation system that connects all parts of the square miles of fields to the central building is invisible. The irrigation system; the air-purifiers; the drainage pipes, are all hidden.
And what one sees is the broad squat red-brick building and Martian desert, rusty and dry, all about
That had been all George Carter had seen upon arriving via rocket-taxi, but him, at least, appearances had not deceived. It would have been strange had it done so, for his life on Ganymede had been oriented in its every phase towards eventual general managership of that very concern. He knew every square inch of the caverns below as well as if he had been born and raised in them himself.
And now he sat in Professor Lemuel Harveyís small office and allowed just the slightest trace of uneasiness to cross his impassive countenance. His ice-blue eyes sought those of Professor Harvey.
ìThis-this twin brother oí mine. Heíll be here soon?î
Professor Harvey nodded, ìHeís on his way over right now.î
George Carter uncrossed his knees. His expression was almost wistful, ìHe looks a lot like me, díya rackon?î
ìQuite a lot. Youíre identical twins, you know.î
ìHmm! Rackon so! Wish Iíd known him all the time-on Ganny!î He frowned. ìHeís lived on Airth allís life, huh?î
An expression of interest crossed Professor Harveyís face. He said briskly, ìYou dislike Earthmen?î
ìNo, not exactly,î came the immediate answer. ìItís just the Airthmen are tanderfeet All of ëm I know are.î
Harvey stifled a grin, and conversation languished.
The door-signal snapped Harvey out of his reverie and George Carter out of his chair at the same instant. The professor pressed the desk-button and the door opened.
The figure on the threshold crossed into the room and then stopped. The twin brothers faced each other.
It was a tense, breathless moment, and Professor Harvey sank into his soft chair, put his finger-tips together and watched keenly.
The two stood stiffly erect, ten feet apart, neither making a move to lessen the distance. They made a curious contrast-a contrast all the more marked because of the vast similarity between the two.
Eyes of frozen blue gazed deep into eyes of frozen blue. Each saw a long, straight nose over full, red lips pressed firmly together. The high cheekbones were as prominent in one as in the other, the jutting, angular chin as square. There was even the same, odd half-cock of one eyebrow in twin expressions of absorbed, part-quizzical interest.
But with the face, all resemblance ended. Allen Carterís clothes bore the New York stamp on every square inch. From his loose blouse, past his dark purple knee breeches, salmon-colored cellulite stockings, down to the glistening sandals on his feet, he stood a living embodiment of latest Terrestrial fashion.
For a fleeting moment, George Carter was conscious of a feeling of ungainliness as he stood there in his tight-sleeved, close-necked shirt of Ganymedan linen. His unbuttoned vest and his voluminous trousers with their ends tucked into high-laced, heavy-soled boots were clumsy and provincial. Even he felt it-for just a moment
From his sleeve-pocket Allen removed a cigarette case-it was the first move either of the brothers had made-opened it, withdrew a slender cylinder of paper-covered tobacco that spontaneously glowed into life at the first puff.
George hesitated a fraction of a second and his subsequent action was almost one of defiance. His hand plunged into his inner vest pocket and drew therefrom the green, shriveled form of a cigar made of Ganymedan greenleaf. A match flared into.flame upon his thumbnail and for a long moment, he matched, puff for puff, the cigarette of his brother.
And then Allen laughed-a queer, high-pitched laugh, ìYour eyes are a little closer together, I think.î
ìRackon ëtis, maybe. Yír hairís fixed sort oí different.î There was faint disapproval in his voice. Allenís hand went self-consciously to his long, light-brown hair, carefully curled at the ends, while his eyes flickered over the carelessly-bound queue into which the otherís equally long hair was drawn.
ìI suppose weíll have to get used to each other. -Iím willing to try.î The Earth twin was advancing now, hand outstretched.
George smiled, ìYí bet. ëAt goes here, too.î
The hands met and gripped.
ìYír nameís Allín, huh?î said George.
ìAnd yours is George, isnít it?î answered Allen.
And then for a long while they said nothing more. They just looked-and smiled as they strove to bridge the twenty-five year gap that separated them.
George Carterís impersonal gaze swept over the carpet of low-growing purple blooms that stretched in plot-path bordered squares into the misty distance of the caverns. The newspapers and feature writers might rhapsodize over the ìFungus Goldî of Mars-about the purified extracts, in yields of ounces to acres of blooms, that had become indispensable to the medical profession of the System. Opiates, purified vitamins, a new vegetable specific against pneumonia-the blooms were worth their weight in gold, almost.
But they were merely blooms to George Carter-blooms to be forced to full growth, harvested, baled, and shipped to the Aresopolis labs hundreds of miles away.
He cut his little ground car to half-speed and leant furiously out the window, ìHi yí mudcat there. Yí with the dairty face. Watch what yír doing-keep the domned water in the channel.î
He drew back and the ground car leapt ahead once more. The Ganymedan muttered viciously to himself, ìThese domned men about here are wairse than useless. So many machines tí do their wairk for ëm they give their brains a pairmenent vacation, I rackon.î
The ground car came to a halt and he clambered out. Picking his way between the fungus plots, he approached the clustered group of men about the spider-armed machine in the plotway ahead.
ìWell, here I am. What is ët, Allín?î
Allenís head bobbed up from behind the other side of the machine. He waved at the men about him, ìStop it for a second!î and leaped toward his twin.
ìGeorge, it works. Itís slow and clumsy, but it works. We can improve it now that weíve got the fundamentals down. And in no time at all, weíll be able to-î
ìNow wait a while, Allín. On Ganny, we go slow. Yí live long, that way. What yí got there?î
Allen paused and swabbed at his forehead. His face shone with grease, sweat, and excitement. ìIíve been working on this thing ever since I finished college. Itís a modification of something we have on Earth-but itís no end improved. Itís a mechanical bloom picker.î
He had fished a much-folded square of heavy paper from his pocket and talked steadily as he spread it on the plotway before them, ìUp to now, bloom-picking has been the bottleneck of production, to say nothing of the 15 to 20% loss due to picking under- and over-ripe blooms. After all, human eyes are only human eyes, and the blooms-Here, look!î
The paper was spread flat and Allen squatted before it George leaned over his shoulder, with frowning watchfulness.
ìYou see. Itís a combination of fluoroscope and photoelectric cell. The ripeness of the bloom can be told by the state of the spores within. This machine is adjusted so that the proper circuit is tripped upon the impingement of just that combination of light and dark formed by ripe spores within the bloom. On the other hand, this second circuit-but look, itís easier to show you.î
He was up again, brimming with enthusiasm. With a jump, he was in the low seat behind the picker and had pulled the lever.
Ponderously, the picker turned towards the blooms and its ìeyeî travelled sideways six inches above the ground. As it passed each fungus bloom, a long spidery arm shot out, lopping it cleanly half an inch from the ground and depositing it neatly in the downward sloping slide beneath. A pile of blooms formed behind the machine.
ìWe can hook on a binder, too, later on. Do you notice those blooms it doesnít touch? Those are unripe. Just wait till it comes to an over-ripe one and see what it does.î
He yelled in triumph a moment later when a bloom was torn out and dropped on the spot.
He stopped the machine, ìYou see? In a month, perhaps, we can actually start putting it to work in the fields.î
George Carter gazed sourly upon his twin, ìTake more ën a month, I rackon. Itíll take foraver, more likely.î
ìWhat do you mean, forever. It just has to be sped up-î
ìI donít care if ët just has tí be painted pairple. ëTisnít going tí appear on my fields.î
ì Your fields?î
ìYup, mine,î was the cool response. ìIíve got veto powír here same as you have. Yí canít do anything ëthout my say-so-and yí wonít get it fír this. In fact, I want yí tí clear that thing out oí here, altogether. Got no use fír ët.î
Allen dismounted and faced his brother, ìYou agreed to let me have this plot to experiment on, veto-free, and Iím holding you to that agreement.î
ìAll right, then. But keep yír domned machine out oí the rest oí the fields.î
The Earthman approached the other slowly. There was a dangerous look in his eyes. ìLook, George, I donít like your attitude-and I donít like the way youíre using your veto power. I donít know what youíre used to running on Ganymede, but youíre in the big time now, and there are a lot of provincial notions youíll have to get out of your head.î
ìNot unless I want to. And if yí want tí have ët out with me, weíd better go tí yír office. Spatting before the men ëd be bad for discipline.î
The trip back to Central was made in ominous silence. George whistled softly to himself while Allen folded his arms and stared with ostentatious indifference at the narrow, twisting plotway ahead. The silence persisted as they entered the Earthmanís office. Allen gestured shortly towards a chair and the Ganymedan took it without a word. He brought out his ever-present green-leaf cigar and waited for the other to speak.
Allen hunched forward upon the edge of his seat and leaned both elbows on his desk. He began with a rush.
ìThereís lots to this situation, George, thatís a mystery to me. I donít know why they brought up you on Ganymede and me on Earth, and I donít know why they never let us know of each other, or made us co-managers now with veto-power over one another-but I do know that the situation is rapidly growing intolerable.
ìThis corporation needs modernization, and you know that. Yet youíve been wielding that veto-power over every trifling advance Iíve tried to initiate. I donít know just what your viewpoint is, but Iíve a suspicion that you think youíre still living on Ganymede. If youíre still in the sticks,-Iím warning you-get out of them fast. Iím from Earth, and this corporation is going to be run with Earth efficiency and Earth organization. Do you understand?î
George puffed odorous tobacco at the ceiling before answering, but when he did, his eyes came down sharply, and there was a cutting edge to his voice.
ìAirth, is it? Airth efficiency, no less? Well, Allín, I like ye. I canít help it Yír so much like me, that disliking yí would be like disliking myself, I rackon. I hate tí say this, but yír upbringingís all wrong.î
His voice became sternly accusatory, ìYír an Airthman. Well, look at yí. Airthmanís but half a man at best, and naturally yí lean on machines. But dí yí suppose I want the corporation to be run by machines-just machines ? Whatíre the men tí do?î
ìThe men run the machines,î came the clipped, angry response.
The Ganymedan rose, and a fist slammed down on the desk, ìThe machines run the men, and yî know it. Fairst, yí use them; then yí depend on them; and finally yír slaves tí them. Over on yír pracious Airth, it was machines, machines, machines-and as a result, what are yí? Iíll tell yí. Half a man!î
He drew himself up, ìI still like yí. I like yí weU enough f wish yîd lived on Gannie with me. By Jupe ëní domn, ëtwould have made a man oí yí.î
ìFinished?î said Allen.
ìRackon so!î
ìThen Iíll tell you something. Thereís nothing wrong with you that a life time on a decent planet wouldnít have fixed. As it is, however, you belong on Ganymede. Iíd advise you to go back there.î
George spoke very softly, ìYír not thinking oí taking a punch at me, are yí?î
ìNo. I couldnít fight a mirror image of myself, but if your face were only a little different, I would enjoy splashing it about the premises a bit.î
ìThink yí could do it-an Airthman like you? Here, sit down. Weíre both getting a bit too excited, I rackon. Nothingí!! be settled this way.î
He sat down once more, puffed vainly at his dead cigar, and tossed it into the incinerator chute in disgust.
ìWhereís yír water?î he grunted.
Allen grinned with sudden delight, ìWould you object to having a machine supply it?î
ìMachine? What dí yí mean?î The Ganymedan gazed about him suspiciously.
ìWatch! I had this installed a week ago.î He touched a button on his desk and a low click sounded below. There was the sound of pouring water for a second or so and then a circular metal disk beside the Earthmanís right hand slid aside and a cup of water lifted up from below.
ìTake it,î said Allen.
George lifted it gingerly and drank it down. He tossed the empty cup down the incinerator shaft, then stared long and thoughtfully at his brother, ìMay I see this water feeder o* yírs?î
ìSurely. Itís just under the desk. Here, Iíll make room for you.î
The Ganymedan crawled underneath while Allen watched uncertainly. A brawny hand was thrust out suddenly and a muffled voice said, ìHand me a screwdriver.î
ìHere! What are you going to do?î
ìNothing. Nothing ët all. Just want tí investigate this contraption.î
The screw-driver was handed down and for a few minutes there was no other sound than an occasional soft scraping of metal on metal. Finally, George withdrew a flushed face and adjusted his wrinkled collar with satisfaction.
ìWhich button do I press for the water?î
Allen gestured and the button was pressed. The gurgling of water sounded. The Earthman stared in mystification from his desk to his brother and back again. And then he became aware of a moistness about his feet.
He jumped, looked downwards, and squawked in dismay, ìWhy, damn you, what have you done?î A snaky stream of water wriggled blindly out from under the desk and the pouring sound of water still continued.
George made leisurely for the door, ìJust short-caircuited it. Hereís yír screw-driver; fix ët up again.î And just before he slammed the door, ìSo much fír yír pracious machines. They go wrong at the wrong times.î
The sounder was buzzily insistent and Allen Carter opened one eye peevishly. It was still dark.
With a sigh, he lifted one arm to the head of his bed and put the Audiomitter into commission.
The treble voice of Amos Wells of the night shift squawked excitedly at him. Allenís eyes snapped open and he sat up.
ìYouíre crazy!î But he was plunging into his breeches even as he spoke. In ten seconds, he was careening up the steps three at a time. He shot into the main office just behind the charging figure of his twin brother.
The place was crowded;-its occupants in a jitter.
Allen brushed his long hair out of his eyes, ìTurn on the turret searchlight!î
ìItís on,î said someone helplessly.
The Earthman rushed to the window and looked out. The yellow beam reached dimly out a few feet and ended in a muddy murkiness. He pulled at the window and it lifted upwards grittily a few inches. There was a whistle of wind and a tornado of coughing from within the room. Allen slammed it down again and his hands went at once to his tear-filled eyes.
George spoke between sneezes, ìWeíre not located in the sandstorm zone. This canít be one.î
ìIt is,î asserted Wells in a squeak. ìItís the worst Iíve ever seen. Started full blast from scratch just like that. It caught me flat-footed. By the time I closed off all exits to above, it was too late.î
ìToo late!î Allen withdrew his attention from his sand-filled eyes and snapped out the words, ìToo late for what?î
ìToo late for our rolling stock. Our rockets got it worst of all. There isnít one that hasnít its propulsives clogged with sand. And that goes for our irrigation pumps and the ventilating system. The generators below are safe but everything else will have to be taken apart and put together again. Weíre stalled for a week at least. Maybe more.î
There was a short, pregnant silence, and then Allen said, ìTake charge. Wells. Put the men on double shift and tackle the irrigation pumps first. Theyíve got to be in working order inside of twenty-four hours, or half the crop will dry up and die on us. Here-wait, Iíll go with you.î
He turned to leave, but his first footstep froze in midair at the sight of Michael Anders, communications officer, rushing up the stairs.
ìWhatís the matter?î
Anders spoke between gasps, ìThe damned planetís gone crazy. Thereís been the biggest quake in history with its center not ten miles from Aresopolis.î
There was a chorus of ìWhat?î and a ragged follow-up of blistering imprecations. Men crowded in anxiously;-many had relatives and wives in the Martian metropolis.
Anders went on breathlessly, ìIt came all of a sudden. Aresopolis is in ruins and fires have started. There arenít any details but the transmitter at our Aresopolis labs went dead five minutes ago.î
There was a babel of comment The news spread out into the furthest recesses of Central, and excitement waxed to dangerously panicky proportions. Allen raised his voice to a shout.
ìQuiet, everyone. Thereís nothing we can do about Aresopolis. Weíve got our own troubles. This freak storm is connected with the quake some way-and thatís what we have to take care of. Everyone back to his work now-and work fast. Theyíll be needing us at Aresopolis damned soon.î He turned to Anders, ìYou! Get back to that receiver and donít knock off until youíve gotten in touch with Aresopolis again. Coming with me, George?î
ìNo, rackon not,î was the response. ìYí tend tí yír machines. Iíll go down with Anders.î
Dawn was breaking, a dusky, lightless dawn, when Allen Carter returned to Central. He was weary-weary in mind and body-and looked it. He entered the radio room.
ìThings are a mess. If-î
There was a ìShhhî and George waved frantically. Allen fell silent. Anders bent over the receiver, turning tiny dials with nervous fingers.
Anders looked up, ìItís no use, Mr. Carter. Canít get them.î
ìAll right. Stay here and keep yír ears open. Let me know if anything turns up.î
He walked out, hooking an arm underneath his brotherís and dragging the latter out.
ìWhen cín we get out the next shipment, Allín?î
ìNot for at least a week. We havenít a thing thatíll either roll or fly for days, and it will be even longer before we can start harvesting again.î
ìHave we any supplies on hand now?î
ìA few tons of assorted blooms-mainly the red-purples. The Earth shipment last Tuesday took off almost everything.î
George fell into a reverie.
His brother waited a moment and said sharply, ìWell, whatís on yourí mind? Whatís the news from Aresopolis?î
ìDomned bad! The quakeís leveled three-fourths oí Aresopolis and the restís pretty much gutted with fire, I rackon. There ëre fifty thousand thatíll have tí camp out nights.-Thatís no fun in Martian autumn weather with the Airth gravity system broken down.î
Allen whistled, ìPneumonia!î
ìAnd common colds and influenza and any oí half dozín diseases tí say nothing oí people bairnt. -Old Vincent is raising cain.î
ìWants blooms?î
ìHeís only got a two-day supply on hand. Heís got tí have more.î
Both, were speaking quietly, almost with indifference, with the vast understatement that is all that makes great crises bearable.
There was a pause and then George spoke again, ìWhatís the best we cín do?î
ìNot under a week-not if we kill ourselves to do it. If they could send over a ship as soon as the storm dies down, we might be able to send what we have as a temporary supply until we can get over with the rest.î
ìSilly even tí think oí that. The Aresopolis port is just ruins. They havenít a ship tí their names.î
Again silence. Then Allen spoke in a low, tense voice. ìWhat are you waiting for? Whatís that look on your face for?î
ìIím waiting fr yí tí admit yír domned machines have failed yí in the fairest emairgency weíve had tí meet.î
ìAdmitted,î snarled the Earthman.
ìGood! And now its up tí me tí show yí what human ingenuity can do.î He handed a sheet of paper to his brother, ìThereís a copy of the message I sent Vincent.î
Allen looked long at his brother and slowly read the pencilled scribbling.
ìWill deliver all we have on hand in thirty-six hours. Hope it will keep you going the few days until we can get a real shipment out. Things are a little rough out here.î
ìHow are you going to do it?î demanded Allen, upon finishing.
ìIím trying to show yí,î answered George, and Allen realized for the first time that they had left Central and were out in the caverns.
George led the way for five minutes and stopped before an object bulking blackly in the dimness. He turned on the section lights and said, ìSand truck!î
The sand truck was not an imposing object. With the low driving car in front and the three squat, open-topped freightcars behind, it presented a picture of obsolete decrepitude. Fifteen years ago, it had been relegated to the dust-heap by the sand-sleds and rocket-freights.
The Ganymedan was speaking, ìChecked it an hour ago, míself, and ëtis still in wairking order. It has shielded bearings, air conditioning unit fír the driving car, and an intairnal combustion engine.î
The other looked up sharply. There was an expression of distaste on his face. ìYou mean it burns chemical fuel.î
ìYup! Gasíline. Thatís why I like it. Reminds me oí Ganymede. On Gannie, I had a gas engine that-î
ìBut wait a while. We havenít any of that gasoline.î
ìNo, rackon not. But we got lots oí liquid hydrocarbons round the place. How about Solvent D? Thatís mostly octane. Weíve got tanks oí it.î
Allen said, ìThatís so;-but the truck holds only two.î
ìI know it. Iím one.î
ìAnd Iím the other.î
George grunted, ìI rackond yíd say that-but this isnít going tí be a push-button machine job. Rackon yír up tí it,- Airthman?î
ìI reckon I am-Gannie.î
The sun had been up some two hours before the sandtruckís engine whirred into life, but outside, the murk had become, if anything, thicker.
The main driveway within the caverns was ahum with activity. Grotesque figures with eyes peering through the thick glass of improvised air-helmets stepped back as the truckís broad, sand-adapted wheels began their slow turn. The three cars behind had been piled high with purple blooms, canvas covers had been thrown over them and bound down tightly,- and now the signal was given to open the doors.
The lever was jerked downwards and the double doors separated with sand-clogged protests. Through a gray whirl of inblown sand, the truck made its way outwards, and behind it sand-coated figures brushed at their air-helmets and closed the doors again.
George Carter, inured by long Ganymedan custom, met the sudden gravity change as they left the protective Gravitor fields of the caverns, with a single long-drawn breath. His hands held steady upon the wheels. His Terrestrial brother, however, was in far different condition. The hard nauseating knot into which his stomach tied itself loosened only very gradually, and it was a long time before his irregular stertorous breathing approached anything like normality again.
And throughout, the Earthman was conscious of the otherís side-long glance and of just a trace of a smile about the otherís lips.
It was enough to keep the slightest moan from issuing forth, though his abdominal muscles cramped and icy perspiration bathed his face.
The miles clicked off slowly, but the illusion of motionlessness was almost as complete as that in space. The surroundings were gray-uniform, monotonous and unvarying. The noise of the engine was a harsh purr and the clicking of the air-purifier behind like a drowsy tick. Occasionally, there was an especially strong gust of wind, and a patter of sand dashed against the window with a million tiny, separate pings.
George kept his eye strictly upon the compass before him. The silence was almost oppressive.
And then the Ganymedan swivelled his head, and growled, ìWhatís wrong with the domned ventílator?î
Allen squeezed upward, head against the low top, and then turned back, pale-faced, ìItís stopped.î
ìItíll be hours ëfore the stormís over. Yeíve got tí have air till then. Craw] in back there and start it again.î His voice was flat and final.
ìHere,î he said, as the other crawled over his shoulder into the back of the car. ìHereís the tool-kit. Yív got ëbout twenty minutes ëfore the air gets too foul tí breathe. ëTis pretty bad now.î
The clouds of sand hemmed in closer and the dim yellow light above Georgeís head dispelled only partially the darkness within.
There was the sound of scrambling from behind him and then Allenís voice, ìDamn this rope. Whatís it doing here?î There was a hammering and then a disgusted curse.
ìThis thing is choked with rust.î
ìAnything else wrong?î called out the Ganymedan.
ìDonít know. Wait till I clear it out.î More hammering and an almost continuous harsh, scraping sound followed.
Allen backed into his seat once more. His face dripped rusty perspiration and a swab with the back of an equally damp, rust-covered hand did it no good.
ìThe pump is leaking like a punctured kettle, now that the rustís been knocked loose. Iíve got it going at top speed, but the only thing between it and a total breakdown is a prayer.î
ìStart praying,î said George, bruskly. ìPray for a button to push.î
The Earthman frowned, and stared ahead in sullen silence.
At four in the afternoon, the Ganymedan drawled, ìAirís beginning tí thin out, looks like.î
Allen snapped to alertness. The air was foul and humid within. The ventilator behind swished sibilantly between each click and the clicks were spacing themselves further apart. It wouldnít hold out much longer now.
ìHow much ground have we covered?î
ìëBout a thaird oí the distance,î was the reply. ìHow ër y* holding out?î
ìWell enough,î Allen snapped back. He retired once more into his shelL
Night came and the first brilliant stars of a Martian night peeped out when with a last futile and long-sustained swi-i-i-s-s-sh, the ventilator died.
ìDomn!î said George. ìI canít breathe this soup any longer, anyway. Open the windows.î
The keenly cold Martian wind swept in and with it the last traces of sand. George coughed as he pulled his woolen cap over his ears and turned on the heaters.
ìYí can still taste the grit.î
Allen looked wistfully up into the skies, ìThereís Earth- with the moon hanging right onto her tail.î
ìAirth?î repeated George with fine contempt. His finger pointed horizonwards, ìThereís good old Jupe for yí.î
And throwing back his head, he sang in a full throated baritone:
ìWhen the golden orb oí Jove
Shines down from the skies above,
Then my spirit longs to go
To that happy land I know, Back tí good, old Ganyme-e-e-e-ede .î
The last note quavered and broke, and quavered and broke again and still again in an ever increasing rapidity of tempo until its vibrating ululation pierced the air about ear-shatteringly.
Allen stared at his brother wide-eyed, ìHow did you do that?î
George grinned, ìThatís the Gannie quaver. Didnít yí ever hear it before?î
The Earthman shook his head, ìIíve head of it, but thatís all.î
The other became a bit more cordial, ìWell, oí course yí can only do it in a thin atmosphere. Yí should hear me on Gannie. I cíd shake yí right off yír chair when Iím going good. Here! Wait till I gulp down some coffee, and then Iíll sing yí vairse twenty-four oí the ëBallad oí Ganymede.í ì
He took a deep breath:
ìThereís a fair-haired maid I love
Standing in the light oí Jove
And sheís waiting there for me-e-e-e-e.
Then-î
Allen grasped him by the arm and shook him. The Ganymedan choked into silence.
ìWhatís the matter?î he asked sharply.
ìThere was a thumping sound on the roof just a second ago. Thereís something up there.î
George stared upwards, ìGrab the wheel. Iíll go up.î
Allen shook his head, ìIím going myself. I wouldnít trust myself running this primitive contraption.î
He was out on the running board the next instant.
ìKeep her going,î he shouted, and threw one foot up onto the roof.
He froze in that position when he became aware of two yellow slits of eyes staring hard into his. It took not more than a second for him to realize that he was face to face with a keazel , a situation which for discomfort is about on a par with the discovery of a rattlesnake in oneís bed back on Earth.
There was little time for mental comparisons of his position with Earth predicaments, however, for the keazel lunged forward, its poisonous fangs agleam in the starlight.
Allen ducked desperately and lost his grip. He hit the sand with a slow-motion thud and the cold, scaly body of the Martian reptile was upon him.
The Earthmanís reaction was almost instinctive. His hand shot out and clamped down hard upon the creatureís narrow muzzle.
In that position, beast and man stiffened into breathless statuary. The man was trembling and within him his heart pounded away with hard rapidity. He scarcely dared move. In the unaccustomed Martian gravity, he found he could not judge movements of his limbs. Muscles knotted almost of their own accord and legs swung when they ought not to.
He tried to lie still-and think.
The keazel squirmed, and from its lips, clamped shut by Earth muscles, issued a tremulous whine. Allenís hand grew slick with perspiration and he could feel the beastís muzzle turn a bit within his palm. He clamped harder, panic-stricken. Physically, the keazel was no match for an Earthman, even a tired, frightened, gravity-unaccustomed Earthman-but one bite, anywhere, was all that was needed.
The keazel jerked suddenly; its back humped and its legs threshed. Allen held on with both hands and could not let go. He had neither gun nor knife. There was no rock on the level desert sands to crack its skull against. The sand-truck had long since disappeared into the Martian night, and he was alone-alone with a keazel .
In desperation, he twisted. The keazelís head bent. He could hear its breath whistling forth harshly-and again there was that low whine.
Allen writhed above it and clamped knees down upon its cold, scaly abdomen. He twisted the head, further and further. The keazel fought desperately, but Allenís Earthly biceps maintained their hold. He could almost sense the beastís agony in the last stages, when he called up all his strength,-something snapped.
And the beast lay still.
He rose to his feet, half-sobbing. The Martian night wind knifed into him and the perspiration froze on his body. He was alone in the desert.
Reaction set in. There was an intense buzzing in his ears. He found it difficult to stand. The wind was biting-but somehow he didnít feel it any more.
The buzzing in his ears resolved itself into a voice-a voice calling weirdly through the Martian wind.
ìAllín, where are yí? Domn yí, yí tanderfoot, where are yí? Allín! A llín!î
New life swept into the Earthman. He tossed the keazelís carcass onto his shoulders and staggered on towards the voice.
ìHere I am, G-Gannie. Right here.î
He stumbled blindly into his brotherís arms.
George began harshly, ìYí blasted Airthman, canít yí even keep yír footing on a sandtruck moving at ten miles per? Yí mightíve-î
His voice died away in a semi-gurgle.
Allen said tiredly, ìThere was a keazel on the roof. He knocked me off. Here, put it somewhere. Thereís a hundred dollar bonus for every keazel skin brought in to Aresopolis.î
He had no clear recollection of anything for the next half hour. When things straightened out, he was in the truck again with the taste of warm coffee in his mouth. The engine was rumbling once more and the pleasant warmth of the heaters surrounded him.
George sat next to him silently, eyes fixed on the desert ahead. But once in a while, he cleared his throat and shot a lightning glance at his brother. There was a queer look in his eyes.
Allen said, ìListen, Iíve got to keep awake,-and you look half dead yourself-so how about teaching me that ëGannie quaverí of yours. Thatís bound to wake the dead.î
The Ganymedan stared even harder and then said gruffly, ìSure, watch mí Adamís apple while I do ët again.î
The sun was half-way to zenith when they reached the canal.
An hour before dawn there had come the crackling sound of hoarfrost beneath the heavy wheels and that signified the end of the desert area and the approach of the canal oasis. With the rising of the sun, the crackling disappeared and the softening mud underneath slowed the sand-adapted truck. The pathetic clumps of gray-green scrub that dotted the flat landscape were the first variant to eternal red sand since the two had started on their journey.
And then Allen had leaned forward and grasped his brother by the arm, ìLook, thereís the canal itself right ahead.î
The ìcanalî-a small tributary of the mighty Jefferson Canal-contained a mere trickle of water at this season of the year. A dirty winding line of dampness, it was, and little more. Surrounding it on both sides were the boggy areas of black mud that were to fill up into a rushing ice-cold current an Earth-year hence.
The sand-truck nosed gingerly down the gentle slope, weaving a tortuous path among the sparsely-strewn boulders brought down by the springís torrents and left there as the sinking waters receded.
It slopped through the mud and splashed clumsily through the puddles. It jounced noisily over rocks, muddied itself past the hubs as it made its way through the murky mid-stream channel and then settled itself for the upward pull out.
And then, with a suddenness that tossed the two drivers out of their seats, it side-slipped, made one futile effort to proceed onwards, and thereafter refused to budge.
The brothers scrambled out and surveyed the situation. George swore lustily, voice more thickly accented than ever.
ìBí Jupe ëní domn, weíre in a pickled situation fír fair. Tis wallowing in the mud there like a blasted pig.î
Allen shoved his hair back wearily, ìWell, donít stand there looking at it. Weíre still a hundred miles or better from Aresopolis. Weíve got to get it out of there.î
ìSure, but how?î His imprecations dropped to sibilant breathings as he reached into the truck for the coil of rope in the back. He looked at it doubtfully.
ìYí get in here, Allín, and when I pull, press down with yír foot on that pedal.î
He was tying the rope to the front axle even as he spoke. He played it out behind him as he slogged out through ankle-deep mud, and stretched it taut.
ìAll right, now, give! î he yelled. His face turned purple with effort as his back muscles ridged. Allen, within the car, pressed the indicated pedal to the floor, heard a loud roar from the engine and a spinning whir from the back wheels. The truck heaved once, and then sank back.
ìëTis no use,î George called. ìI canít get a footing. If the ground were dry, I cíd do it.î
ìIf the ground were dry, we wouldnít be stuck,î retorted Allen. ìHere, give me that rope.í
ìDí yí think yí can do it, if I canít?î came the enraged cry, but the other had already left the car.
Allen had spied the large, deep-bedded boulder from the truck, and it was with relief that he found it to be within reaching distance of the rope. He pulled it taut and tossed its free end about the boulder. Knotting it clumsily, he pulled, and it held.
His brother leaned out of the car window, as he made his way, back, with one lumped Ganymedan fist agitating the air.
ìHi, yí nitwit. Whatíre yí doing? Dí yí expect that overgrown rock tí pull us out?î
ìShut up,î yelled back Allen, ìand feed her the gas when I pull.î
He paused midway between boulder and truck and seized the rope.
ì Give! î he shouted in his turn, and with a sudden jerk pulled the rope towards him with both hands.
The truck moved; its wheels caught hold. For a moment it hesitated with the engine blasting ahead full speed, and Georgeís hands trembling upon the wheel. And then it went over. And almost simultaneously, the boulder at the other end of the taut rope lifted out of the mud with a liquid smacking sound and went over on its side.
Allen slipped the noose off it and ran for the truck.
ìKeep her going,î he shouted, and hopped onto the running board, rope trailing.
ìHow did yí do that?î asked George, eyes round with awe.
ìI havenít got the energy to explain it now. When we get to Aresopolis and after weíve had a good sleep, Iíll draw the triangle of forces for you, and show you what happened. No muscles were involved. Donít look at me as if I were Hercules.î
George withdrew his gaze with an effort, ìTriangle oí forces, is it? I never heard oí it, but if thatís what it cín do, educationís a great thing.î
ìComet-gas! Is any coffee left?î He stared at the last thermos-bottle, shook it near his ear dolefully, and said, ìOh, well, letís practice the quaver. Itís almost as good and Iíve practically got it perfected.î
He yawned prodigiously, ìWill we make it by nightfall?î
ìMaybe!î
The canal was behind them now.
The reddening sun was lowering itself slowly behind the Southern Range. The Southern Range is one of the two ìmountain chainsî left on Mars. It is a region of hills; ancient, time-worn, eroded hills behind which lies Aresopolis.
It possesses the only scenery worth mentioning on all Mars and also the golden attribute of being able, through the updrafts along its sides, to suck an occasional ram out of the desiccated Martian atmosphere.
Ordinarily, perhaps, a pair from Earth and Ganymede might have idled through this picturesque area, but this was definitely not the case with the Carter twins.
Eyes, puffed for lack of sleep, glistened once more at the sight of hills on the horizons. Bodies, almost broken for sheer weariness, tensed once more when they rose against the sky.
And the truck leaped ahead,-for just behind the hills lay Aresopolis. The road they travelled was no longer a rule-edge straight one, guided by the compass, over table-top-flat land. It followed narrow, twisting trails over rocky ground.
They had reached Twin Peaks, then, when there was a sudden sputter from the motor, a few halting coughs and then silence.
Allen sat up and there was weariness and utter disgust in his voice, ìWhatís wrong with this everlastingly-to-be-damned machine now?î
His brother shrugged, ìNothing that I havenít been expecting for the last hour. Weíre out oí gas. Doesnít matter at all. Weíre at Twin Peaks-only ten miles frím the city. We cín get there in an hour, and then they cín send men out here for the blooms.î
ìTen miles in an hour!î protested Allen. ìYouíre crazy.î His face suddenly twisted at an agonizing thought, ìMy God! We canít do it under three hours and itís almost night. No one can last that long in a Martian night. George, weíre-î
George was pulling him out of the car by main force, ìBy Jupe ëní domn, Allín, donít let the tenderfoot show through now. We cín do it in an hour, I tell yí. Didnít yí ever try running under sub-normal gravity? Itís like flying. Look at me.î
He was off, skimming the ground closely, and proceeding in ground-covering leaps that shrank him to a speck up the mountain side in a moment.
He waved, and his voice came thinly, ìCome on!î
Allen started,-and sprawled at the third wide stride, arms nailing and legs straddled wide. The Ganymedanís laughter drifted down in heartless gusts.
Allen rose angrily and dusted himself. At an ordinary walk, he made his way upwards.
ìDonít get sore, Allín,î said George. ìItís just a knack, and Iíve had practice on Gannie. Just pretend yír running along a feather bed. Run rhythmically-a sort oí very slow rhythm- and run close tí the ground; donít leap high. Like this. Watch me!î
The Earthman tried it, eyes on his brother. His first few uncertain strides became surer and longer. His legs stretched and his arms swung as he matched his brother, step for step.
George shouted encouragement and speeded his pace, ìKeep lower tí the ground, Allín. Donít leap ëfore yír toes hit the ground.î
Allenís eyes shone and, for the moment, weariness was forgotten, ìThis is great; It is like flying-or like springs on your shoes.î
ìYí ought tí have lived on Gannie with me. Weíve got special fields fír subgravity races. An expairt racer cín do forty miles an hour at times-and I cín do thirty-five myself. -0í course, the gravity thereís a bit lower than here on Mars.î
Long hair streamed backwards in the wind and skin reddened at the bitter-cold air that blew past. The ruddy patches of sunlight travelled higher and higher up the slopes, lingered briefly upon the very summits and went out altogether. The short Martian twilight started upon its rapidly darkening career. The Evening Star-Earth-was already glimmering brightly, its attendant moon somewhat closer than the night previous.
The passing minutes went unheeded by Allen. He was too absorbed by the wonderful new sensation of sub-gravity running, to do anything more than follow his brother. Even the increasing chilliness scarcely registered upon his consciousness.
It was George, then, upon whose countenance a tiny, puckered uneasiness grew into a vast, panicky frown.
ìHi, Allín, hold up!î he called. Leaning backward, he brought himself to a short, hopping halt full of grace and ease. Allen tried to do likewise, broke his rhythm, and went forward upon his face. He rose with loud reproaches.
The Ganymedan turned a deaf ear to them. His gaze was sombre in the dusk, ìDí yí know where we are, Allín?î
Allen felt a cold constriction about his windpipe as he stared about him quickly. Things looked different in semidarkness, but they looked more different than they ought. It was impossible for things to be so different.
ìWe shouldíve sighted Old Baldy by now, shouldnít we have?î he quavered.
ìWe shídíve sighted him long ago,î came the hard answer. ìëTis that domned quake. Landslides mustíve changed the trails. The peaks themselves mustíve been screwed up-î His voice was thin-edged, ìAllen, ëtisnít any use making believe. Weíre dead lost.î
For a moment, they stood silently-uncertainly. The sky was purple and the hills retreated into the night. Allen licked bluechilled Ups with a dry tongue.
ìWe canít be but a few miles away. Weíre bound to stumble on the city if we look.î
ìConsider the situation, Airthman,î came. the savage, shouted answer, ì ëTis night, Martian night. The temperatureís down past zero and plummeting every minute. We havenít any time tí look;-weíve got tí go straight there. If weíre not there in half an hour, weíre not going tí get there at all.î
Allen knew that well, and mention of the cold increased his consciousness of it. He spoke through chattering teeth as he drew his heavy, fur-lined coat closer about him.
ìWe might build a fire!î The suggestion was a half-hearted one, muttered indistinctly, and fallen upon immediately by the other.
ìWith what?î George was beside himself with sheer disappointment and frustration. ìWeíve pulled through this far, and now weíll probíly freeze tí death within a mile oí the city. Címon keep running. Itís a hundred-tí-one chance.î
But Allen pulled him back. There was a feverish glint in the Earthmanís eye, ìBonfires!î he said irrelevantly. ìItís a possibility. Want to take a chance that might do the trick?î
ìNothin else tí do,î growled the other. ìBut hurry. Every minute I-î
ìThen run with the wind-and keep going.î
ìWhy?î
ìNever mind why. Do what I say-run with the wind!î
There was no false optimism in Allen as he bounded through the dark, stumbling over loose stones, sliding down declivities,-always with the wind at his back. George ran at his side, a vague, formless blotch in the night.
The cold was growing more bitter, but it was not quite as bitter as the freezing pang of apprehension gnawing at the Earthmanís vitals.
Death is unpleasant!
And then they topped the rise, and from Georgeís throat came a loud ìBí Jupe ëní domn!î of triumph.
The ground before them, as far as the eye could see, was dotted by bonfires. Shattered Aresopolis lay ahead, its homeless inhabitants making the night bearable by the simple agency of burning wood.
And on the hilly slopes, two weary figures slapped each other on the backs, laughed wildly, and pressed half-frozen, stubbly cheeks together for sheer, unadulterated joy.
They were there at last!
The Aresopolis lab, on the very outskirts of the city, was one of the few structures still standing. Within, by makeshift light, haggard chemists were distilling the last drops of extract. Without, the cityís police-force remnants were clearing desperate way for the precious flasks and vials as they were distributed to the various emergency medical centers set up in various regions of the bonfire-pocked ruins that were once the Martian metropolis.
Old Hal Vincent supervised the process and his faded eyes ever and again peered anxiously into the hills beyond, watching hopefully but doubtfully for the promised cargo of blooms.
And then two figures reeled out of the darkness and collapsed to halt before him.
Chill anxiety clamped down upon him, ìThe blooms! Where are they? Have you got them?î
ìAt Twin Peaks,î gasped Allen. ìA ton of them and better in a sand-truck. Send for them.î
A group of police ground-cars set off before he had finished, and Vincent exclaimed bewilderedly, ìA sand-truck? Why didnít you send it in a ship? Whatís wrong with you out there, anyway? Earthquake-î
He received no direct answer. George had stumbled towards the nearest bonfire with a beatific expression on his worn face.
ìAhhh, ëtis warm!î Slowly, he folded and dropped, asleep before he hit the ground.
Allen coughed gaspingly, ìHuh! The Gannie tenderfoot! Couldnít-ulp-take it!î
And the ground came up and hit him in the face.
Allen woke with the evening sun in his eyes and the odor of frying bacon in his nostrils. George shoved the frying pan towards him and said between gigantic, wolfing mouthfuls, ìHelp yourself.î
He pointed to the empty sand-truck outside the labs, ìThey got the stuff all right.î
Allen fell to, quietly. George wiped his lips with the back of his hand and said, ìSay, Allín, how ëd yí find the city? Iíve been sitting here trying tí figure it all outî
ìIt was the bonfires,î came the muffled answer. ìIt was the only way they could get heat, and fires over square miles of land create a whole section of heated air, which rises, causing the cold surrounding air of the hills to sweep in.î He suited his words with appropriate gestures. ìThe wind in the hills was heading for the city to replace warm air and we followed the wind. -Sort of a natural compass, pointing to where we wanted to go.î
George was silent, kicking with embarrassed vigor at the ashes of the bonfire of the night before.
ìLisín, Allín, Iíve had yí aíwrong. Yí were an Airthman tanderfoot tí me till-í He paused, drew a deep breath and exploded with, ìWell, by Jupe ní domn, yír my twin brother and Iím proud oí it All Airth cídnít drown out the Carter blood in yí.î
The Earthman opened his mouth to reply but his brother clamped one palm over it, ìYí keep quiet, till Iím finished. After we get back, yí can fix up that mechanical picker or anything else yí want. I drop my veto. If Airth and machines cín tairn out yír kind oí man, theyíre all right. But just the same,î there was a trace of wistfulness in his voice, ìyí got tî admit that everytime the machines broke down-from irrigation-trucks and rocket-ships to ventilators and sand-trucks- tíwas men who had tí pull through in spite oí all that Mars could do.î
Allen wrenched his face from out behind the restraining palm.
ìThe machines do their best,î he said, but not too vehemently.
ìSure, but thatís all they can do. When the emairgency comes, a manís got tí do a damn lot better than his.best or heís a goner.î
The other paused, nodded, and gripped the otherís hand with sudden fierceness, ìOh, weíre not so different. Earth and Ganymede are plastered thinly over the outside of us, but inside-î
He caught himself.
ìCome on, letís give out with that old Gannie quaver.î
And from the two fraternal throats tore forth a shrieking eldritch yell such as the thin, cold Martian air had seldom before carried.



***



I got the cover again with ìHeredity.î
In connection with that story, I remember best a comment I received from a young fellow named Scott Feldman (who was then still in his teens but who was later, as Scott Meredith, to become one of the most important literary agents in the business). He disapproved of the story because I introduced two characters at the start who disappeared from the story and were never heard of again.
Once that was pointed out to me, it seemed to me that this was indeed a major flaw, and I wondered why neither Campbell nor Pohl had specifically pointed it out. I never quite had the courage to ask, however.
But it did cause me to look at my stories more closely thereafter, and to realize again that writing isnít all inspiration and free flow. You do have to ask yourself pretty mechanical questions, such as, ìWhat do I do with this character now that Iíve taken the trouble to make use of him?î
By the time Campbell was rejecting, and Pohl accepting ìHeredity,î I was writing ìHistory.î The same thing happened. I submitted it to Campbell on September 13. It was rejected, and, eventually, Pohl took it.








History


Ullenís lank arm pushed the stylus carefully and painstakingly across the paper; his near-sighted eyes blinked through thick lenses. The signal light flashed twice before he answered.
He turned a page, and called out, ìIs dat you, Johnnie? Come in, please.î
He smiled gently, his thin, Martian face alight with pleasure.
ìSit down, Johnnie-but first lower de window-shade. De glare of your great Eard sun is annoying. Ah, datís good, and sid down and be very, very quiet for just a little while, because I am busy.î
John Brewster shifted a pile of ill-stacked papers and seated himself. He blew the dust from the edges of an open book in the next chair and looked reproachfully on the Martian historian.
ìAre you still poking around these musty old things? Donít you get tired?î
ìPlease, Johnnie,î Ullen did not look up, ìyou will lose de page. Dat book dere is William Stewartís ëHitlerian Eraí and it is very hard to read. So many words he uses which he doesnít explain.î
His expression as it focussed upon Johnnie was one of frowning petulance, ì Never do dey explain deir terms. It is so unscientific. On Mars, before we even start, we say, ëDis is a list of all definitions of terms to be used.í How oderwise can people talk sensibly? Hmp! You crazy Eardmen.î
ìOh, nuts, Ullen-forget it. Why donít you look at me. Donít you even notice anything?î
The Martian sighed, removed his glasses, cleaned them thoughtfully, and carefully replaced them. He stared impersonally at Johnnie, ìWell, I think it is new clothes you are wearing. Is it not so?î
ìNew clothes! Is that all you can say, Ullen? This is a uniform. Iím a member of the Home Defense.î He rose to his feet, a picture of boyish exuberance.
ìWhat is dis ëHome Defenseí?î asked Ullen languidly.
Johnnie gulped and sat down helplessly, ìYou know, I really think you havenít heard that Earth and Venus have been at war for the last week. Iíll bet money you havenít.î
ìIíve been busy.î He frowned and pursed his thin, bloodless lips, ìOn Mars, dere is no war-at least, dere isnít any more. Once, we used to fight, but dat was long ago. Once we were scientists, too, and dat was long ago. Now, dere are only a few of us-and we do not fight Dere is no happiness dat way.î He seemed to shake himself, and spoke more briskly, ìTell me, Johnnie, do you know where it is I can find what it means, dis ënational honor?í It holds me back. I canít go furder unless I can understand it.î
Johnnie rose to his full height and glittered in the spotless green of the Terrestrial Service. He laughed with fond indulgence, ìYouíre hopeless, Ullen,-you old coot. Arenít you going to wish me luck? Iím hitting space tomorrow.î
ìOh, is dere danger?î
There was a squawk of laughter, ìDanger? What do you think?î
ìWell, den, to seek danger-it is foolish. Why do you do it?î
ìYou wouldnít understand, Ullen. Just wish me luck and say you hope I come through whole.î
ìCer-tain-ly!.1 donít want anyone to die.î He slipped his hand into the strong fist held out to him. ìTake care of yourself, Johnnie-and wait, before you go, bring me Stewartís book. Everything is so heavy here on Eard. Heavy, heavy,- and de words have no definitions.î
He sighed, and was back at his books as Johnnie slipped quietly out of the room.
ìDese barbarous people,î he muttered sleepily to himself. ìWar! Dey dink dat by killing-î His voice died away and merged into a slurred mumble as his eyes followed creeping finger across the page.
ìëFrom the very moment of the union of the Anglo-Saxon world into a single governmental entity and even as far back as the spring of 1941, it was evident that the doom of-í ì
ìDese crazy Eardmeniî
Ullen leaned heavily upon his crutches on the steps of the University library and one thin hand shielded his watering eyes from the terrible Earthly sun.
The sky was blue, cloudless,-undisturbed. Yet somewhere up above, beyond the planetís airy blanket, steel-sided ships were veering and sparkling in vicious combat. And down upon the city were falling the tiny ìDrops of Death,î the highly radioactive bombs that noiselessly and inexorably ate out a fifteen foot crater wherever they fell.
The cityís population was herding into the shelters and burying themselves inside the deep-set leaden cells. Upstaring, silent, anxious, they streamed past Ullen. Uniformed guards invested some sort of order into the gigantic flight, steering the stragglers and speeding the laggards.
The air was filled with barked orders.
ìHit the shelter, Pop, Better get going. You canít stand there, you know.î
Ullen turned to the guard who addressed him and slowly brought his wandering thoughts to bear upon the situation.
ìI am sorry, Eardman-but I cannot move very fast on your huge world.î He tapped one crutch upon the marble flags beneath. îDings are so heavy. If I were to crowd in wid de rest, I would be crushed.î
He smiled gently down from his lank height, and the guard rubbed a stubbly chin, ìAll right, pop, I can fix that. It is tough on you Marsies at that-Here, hold those crutches up out of the way.î
With a heave, he cradled the Martian, ìHold your legsî close to my body, because weíre going to travel fast.î
His bulky figure pressed through the line of Earthmen. Ullen shut his eyes as the rapid motion under supernormal gravity stirred his stomach into rebellion. He opened them once again in the dim recesses of the low-ceilinged shelter.
The guard set him down carefully and adjusted the crutches beneath Ullenís armpits, ìO.K. Pop. Take care of yourself.î
Ullen took in his surroundings and hobbled to one of the low benches at the near end of the shelter. From behind him came the sombre clang of the thick, leaden door.
The Martian historian fished a worn tablet from his pocket and scribbled slow notes. He disregarded the excited babble that arose about him and the scraps of heated talk that filled the air thickly.
And then he scratched at his furrowed forehead with the stub end of his pencil, meeting the staring eyes of the man sitting next to him. He smiled abstractedly and returned to his notes.
ìYouíre a Martian, arenít you?î His neighbor spoke in quick, squeaky tones. ìI donít like foreigners much, but Iíve got nothing special against Marsies. These Veenies, now, they-î
Ullenís soft tones interrupted him. ìHate is all wrong, I dink. Dis war is a great annoyance-a great one. It interferes wid my work and you Eardmen ought to stop it. Is it not so?î
ìYou can bet your hide weíre going to stop it,î came the emphatic reply. ìWeíre going to bash their planet inside out- and the dirty Veenies with it.î
ìYou mean attack deir cities like dis?î The Martian blinked owlishly in thought, ìYou dink dat would be best?î
ìDamn it, yes. It-î
ìBut look.î Ullen placed a skeleton finger in one palm and continued in gentle argument. ìWould it not be easier to get de ships demselves by de fall-apart weapon?-Donít you dink so? Or is it dat de Venus people, dey have de screens?î
ìWhat weapon, did you say?î
Ullen ruminated carefully, ìI suppose dat isnít de name you call it by-but I donít know about weapons, anyway. We call it on Mars de ë skellingbeg í and dat means in English ëfallapart weapon.í Now you know?î
There was no direct answer unless a vague under-breath mutter could be called one. The Earthman pushed away from his companion and stared at the opposite wall in a fidget.
Ullen sensed the rebuff and shrugged one shoulder wearily, ìIt is not dat I care much about de whole ding. It is only dat de war is a big bodder. It should be ended.î He sighed, ìBut I donít care!î
His fingers had just begun manipulating the pencil once more in its travels across the open tablet on his lap, when he looked up again.
ìTell me, please, what is de name of dat country where Hitler died. Your Eard names, dey are so complicated sometimes. I dink it begins wid an M.î
His neighbor ripped him open with a stare and walked away. Ullenís eyes followed him with a puzzled frown.
And then the all-clear signal sounded.
ìOh, yes,î said Ullen. ìMadagascar I Such a silly name!î
Johnnie Brewsterís uniform was war-worn now; a bit more wrinkled about the neck and shoulders, a trace more worn at knees and elbows.
Ullen ran his finger along the angry scar that ran the length of Johnnieís right fore-arm, ìIt hurts no more, Johnnie?î
ìNuts! A scratch! I got the Veenie that did that. Heís chasing dreams in the moon now.î
ìYou were in de hospital long, Johnnie?î
ìA week!î He lit a cigarette, pushed some of the mess off the Martianís desk and seated himself. ìIíve spent the rest of the time with my family, though I did get around to visiting you, you see.î
He leaned over and poked an affectionate hand at the Martianís leathery cheek, ìArenít you going to say youíre glad to see me?î
Ullen removed his glasses and peered at the Earthman, ìWhy, Johnnie, are you so uncertain dat I am glad to see you, dat you require I should say it in words?î He paused, ìIíll make a note of dat. You silly Eardmen must always be telling each oder dese simple dings-and den you donít believe it anyway. On Mars-î
He was rubbing his glasses methodically, as he spoke, and now he replaced them, ìJohnnie, donít you Eardmen have de ëfall-apartí weapon? I met a person once in de raid shelter and he didnít know what I was talking about.î
Johnnie frowned, ìI donít either, for that matter. Why do you ask?î
ìBecause it seems strange dat you should have to fight so hard dese Venus men, when dey donít seem to have de screens to stop it wid. Johnnie, I want de war should be over. It makes me all de time stop my work to go to a shelter.î
ìHold on, now, Ullen. Donít sputter. What is this ëfall-apartí weapon? A disintegrator? What do you know about it?î
ìI? I know nodding about it at all. I dought you knew- datís why I asked. Back on Mars, in our histories, dey talk about using dat kind of weapon in our old wars. But we donít know nodding about weapons any more. Anyway, deyíre so silly, because de oder side always dinks of someding which protects against it, and den everyding is de same as always.- Johnnie, do you suppose you could go down to de desk and ask for a copy of Higginboddamís ëBeginnings of Space Travel?íì
The Earthman clenched his fists and shook them impotently, ìUllen, you damned Martian pedant-donít you understand that this is important? Earth is at war! War! War! War! î
ìWell, den, stop de war.î There was irritation in Ullenís voice. ìDere is no peace and quiet anywheres on Eard. I wish I had dis library-Johnnie, be careful. Please, what are you doing? Youíre hurting me.î
ìIím sorry, Ullen, but youíve got to come with me. Weíre going to see about this.î Johnny had the feebly protesting Martian wedged into the wheel-chair and was off with a rush, before he had finished the sentence.
A rocket-taxi was at the bottom of the Library steps, and together chauffeur and Spaceman lifted the chair inside. With a comet-tail of smoke, they were off.
Ullen moaned softly at the acceleration, but Johnnie ignored him. ìWashington in twenty minutes, fellow,î he said to the driver, ìand ignore the signal beams.î
The starched secretary spoke in a frozen monotone, ìAdmiral Korsakoff will see you now.î
Johnnie wheeled and stamped out the last cigarette butt. He shot a hasty glance at his watch and grunted.
At the motion of the wheel-chair, Ullen roused himself out of a troubled sleep. He adjusted his glasses, ìDid dey let us in finally, Johnnie?î
ìShhh!î
Ullenís impersonal stare swept over the rich furnishings of the room, the huge maps of Earth and Venus on the wall, the imposing desk in the center. It lingered upon the pudgy, bearded figure behind this desk and then came to rest upon the lanky, sandy-haired man at his side.
The Martian attempted to rise from the chair in sudden eagerness, ìArenít you Dr. Doming? I saw you last year at Princeton. You remember me, donít you? Dey gave me at dat time, my honorary degree.î
Dr. Thorning had advanced and shook hands vigorously, ìCertainly. You spoke then on Martian historical methods, didnít you?î
ìOh, you remember. Iím glad! But dis is a great opportunity for me, meeting you. Tell me, as a scientist, what would be your opinion of my deory dat de social insecurity of de Hitlerian Era was de direct cause for de lag-î
Dr. Thorning smiled, ìIíll discuss it with you later, Dr. Ullen. Right now, Admiral Korsakoff wants information from you, with which we hope to end the war.î
ìExactly,î Korsakoff spoke in clipped tones as he met Ullenís mild gaze. ìAlthough a Martian, I presume you favor the victory of the principles of freedom and justice over the foul practices of Venusian tyranny.î
Ullen stared uncertainly, ìDat sounds familiar-but I donít dink about it much. You mean, maybe, de war should end?î
ìWith victory, yes.î
ìOh, ëvictory,í dat is just a silly word. History proves dat a war decided on military superiority only lays de groundwork for future wars of retaliation and revenge. I refer you to a very good essay on de subject by a James Calkins. It was published all de way back in 2050.î
ìMy dear sir!î
Ullen raised his voice in bland indifference to Johnnieís urgent whisperings. ìNow to end de war-really end it-you should say to de plain people of Venus, ëIt is unnecessary to fight. Let us just talkí-î
There was the slam of fist on desk and a muttered oath of frightful import. ìFor Godís sakes, Thorning, get what you want out of him. I give you five minutes.î
Thorning stifled his chuckle, ìDr. Ullen, we want you to tell us what you know about the disintegrator.î
ìDisintegrator?î Ullen put a puzzled finger to his cheek.
ìThe one you told Lieutenant Brewster of.î
ìUmmmm- Oh! You mean de ëfall-apartí weapon. I donít know nodding about it De Martian historians mention it some times, but none of dem know about it-de technical side, dat is.î
The sandy-haired physicist nodded patiently, ìI know, I know. But what do they say? What kind of a weapon is it?î
ìWell, de way dey talk about it, it makes de metals to fall to pieces. What is it you call de ding dat holds metals togedder/now?î
ìIntra-molecular forces?î
Ullen frowned and then spoke thoughtfully, ìMaybe. I forgot what de Martian word is-except dat itís long. Anyway, dis weapon, it makes dis force dat holds de metals to gedder not to exist anymore and it all falls apart in a powder. But it only works on de dree metals, Iron, cobalt, and-uh-de odder one!î
ìNickel,î prompted Johnnie, softly.
ìYes, yes, nickel!î
Thorningís eyes glittered, ìAha, the ferromagnetic elements. Thereís an oscillating magnetic field mixed up in this, or Iím a Veenie. How about it, Ullen?î
The Martian sighed, ìSuch crazy Eard words.-Letís see now, most of what I know about de weapon is from de work of Hogel Beg. It was-Iím pretty sure-in his ìCultural and Social History of de Dird Empire.î It was a huge work in twenty-four volumes, but I always dought it was radder mediocre. His technique in de presentation of-î
ìPlease,î said Thorning, ìthe weapon-î
ìOh, yes, dat! î He hitched himself higher in his chair and grimaced with the effort. ìHe talks about electricity and it goes back and ford very fast- very fast, and its pressure-î He paused hopelessly, and regarded the scowling visage of the bearded Admiral naively, ìI dink de word is pressure, but I donít know, because it is hard to translate. De Martian word is ë cranstard .í Does dat help?î
ìI think you mean ëpotential,í Dr. Ullen!î Thorning sighed audibly.
ìWell, if you say so. Anyway, dis ëpotentialí changes also very fast and de two changes are synchronized somehow along wid magnetism dat-uh-shifts and datís all I know about it.î He smiled uncertainly, ìI would like to go back now. It would be all right now, wouldnít it?î
The Admiral vouchsafed no answer, ìDo you make anything out of that mess. Doctor?î
ìDamned little,î admitted the physicist, ìbut it gives me a lead or two. We might try getting hold of this Begís book, but thereís not much hope. It will simply repeat what weíve just heard. Dr. Ullen, are there any scientific works on your planet?î
The Martian saddened, ìNo, Dr. Doming, dey were all destroyed during de Kalynian reaction. On Mars, we doroughly disbelieve in science. History has shown dat it comes from science no happiness.î He turned to the young Earthman at his side, ìJohnnie, let us go now, please.î
Korsakoff dismissed the two with a wave of the hand.
Ullen bent carefully over the closely-typed manuscript and inserted a word. He glanced up brightly at Johnnie Brewster, who shook his head and placed a hand on the Martianís arm. His brow furrowed more deeply.
Ullen,î he said harshly, ìyouíre in trouble.î
ìEh? I? In trouble? Why, Johnnie, dat is not so. My book is coming along famously. De whole first volume, it is completed and, but for a bit of polishing, is ready for de printers.î
ìUllen, if you canít give the government definite information on the disintegrator, I wonít answer for the consequences.î
ìBut I told all I knew-î
ìIt wonít do. Ifs not enough. Youíve got to remember more, Ullen, youíve got to.î
ìBut knowledge where dere is none is impossible to have- dat is an axiom.î Ullen sat upright in his seat, propping himself on a crutch.
ìI know it,î Johnnieís mouth twisted in misery, ìbut youíve got to understand.
ìThe Venusians have control of space; our Asteroid garrisons have been wiped out, and last week Phobos and Deimos fell. Communications between Earth and Luna are broken and God knows how long the Lunar squadron can hold out. Earth itself is scarcely secure and their bombings are becoming more serious-.Oh, Ullen, donít you understand?î
The Martianís look of confusion deepened, ìEard is losing?î
ìGod, yes!î
ìDen give up. Dat is de logical ding to do. Why did you start at all-you stupid Eardmen.î
Johnnie ground his teeth, ìBut if we have the disintegrator, we wonít lose.î
Ullen shrugged, ìOh, Johnnie, it gets wearisome to listen to de same old story. You Eardmen have one-track minds. Look, wouldnít it make you feel better to have me read you some of my manuscript? It would do your intellect good.î
ìAll right, Ullen, youíve asked for it, and hereís everything right out If you donít tell Thorning what he wants to know, youíre going to be arrested and tried for treason.î
There was a short silence, and then a confused stutter, ìT- treason. You mean dat I betray-î The historian removed his glasses and wiped them with shaking hand, ìItís not true. Youíre trying to frighten me.î
ìOh, no, Iím not Korsakoff thinks you know more than youíre telling. Heís sure that youíre either holding out for a price or, more likely, that youíve sold out to the Veenies.î
ìBut Doming-î
ìThorning isnít any too secure himself. He has his own skin to think of. Earth governments in moments of stress are not famous for being reasonable.î There were sudden tears in his -eyes, ìUllen, there must be something you can do. Itís not only you-itís for Earth.î
Ullenís breathing whistled harshly, ìDey tink I would sell my scientific knowledge. Is dat de kind of insult dey pay my sense of eddies; my scientific integrity?î His voice was thick with fury and for the first time since Johnnie knew him, he lapsed into guttural Martian. ìFor dat, I say not a word,î he finished. ìLet dem put me in prison or shoot me, but dis insult I cannot forget.î
There was no mistaking the firmness in his eyes, and Johnnieís shoulders sagged. The Earthman didnít move at the glare of the signal light.
ìAnswer de light, Johnnie,î said the Martian, softly. ìDey are coming for me.î
In a moment, the room was crowded with green uniforms. Dr. Thorning and the two with him were the only ones present in civilian clothes.
Ullen struggled to his feet, ìGentlemen, say nodding. I have heard dat it is dought dat I am selling what I know- selling for money .î He spat the words. ìIt is a ding never before said of me-a ding-F-bave not deserved. If you wish you can imprison me immediately, but I shall say nodding more- nor have anyding furder to do wid de Eard government.î
A green-garbed official stepped forward immediately, but Dr. Thorning waved him back.
ìWhoa, there. Dr. Ullen,î he said jovially, ìdonít jump too soon. Iíve just come to ask if there isnít a single additional fact that you remember. Anything, no matter how insignificant-î
There was stony silence. Ullen leant heavily on his crutches but remained stolidly erect.
Dr. Thorning seated himself imperturably upon the historianís desk, picked up the high stack of type-written pages, ìAh, is this the manuscript young Brewster was telling me about.î He gazed at it curiously, ìWell, of course, you realize that your attitude will force the government to confiscate all this.î
ìEh?î Ullenís stern expression melted into dismay. His crutch slipped and he dropped heavily into his seat.
The physicist warded off the otherís feeble clutch, ìKeep your hands off. Dr. Ullen, Iím taking care of this.î He leafed through the pages with a rustling noise. ìYou see, if you are arrested for treason, your writings become subversive.î
ìSubversive!î Ullenís voice was hoarse, ìDr. Doming, you donít know what you are saying. It is my-my great labor.î His voice caught huskily, ìPlease, Dr. Doming, give me my manuscript.î
The other held it just beyond the Martianís shaking fingers.
ì If -î he said.
ìBut I donít know!î
The sweat stood out on the historianís pale face. His voice came thickly. ìTime! Give me time! But let me dink-and donít, please donít harm dis manuscriptî
The otherís fingers sank painfully into Ullenís shoulder, ìSo help me, I burn your manuscript in five minutes, if-î
ìWait, Iíll tell you. Somewhere-I donít know where-it was said dat in de weapon dey used a special metal for some of de wiring. I donít know what metal, but water spoiled it and had to be kept away-also air. It-î
ìHoly jumping Jupiter ,î came the sudden shout from one of Thorningís companions. ìChief, donít you remember Aspartierís work on sodium wiring in argon atmosphere five years ago-î
Dr. Thorningís eyes were deep with thought, ìWait-wait- wait- Damn! It was staring us in the face-î
ìI know,î shrieked Ullen suddenly. ìIt was in Karlsto. He was discussing de fall of Gallonie and dat was one of de minor causes-de lack of dat metal-and den he mentioned-î
He was talking to an empty room, and for a while he was silent in puzzled astonishment.
And then, ìMy manuscript!î He salvaged it from where it lay scattered over the floor, hobbling painfully about, smoothing each wrinkled sheet with care.
ìDe barbarians-to treat a great scientific work so!î
Ullen opened still another drawer and scrabbled through its contents. He closed it and looked about peevishly, ìJohnnie, where did I put dat bibliography? Did you see it?î
He looked toward the window, ìJohnnielî
Johnnie Brewster said, ìWait a while, Ullen. Here they come now.î
The streets below were a burst of color. In a long, stiffly-moving line the Green of the Navy paraded down the avenue, the air above them snow-thick with confetti, hail-thick with ticker-tape. The roar of the crowd was dull, muted.
ìAh, de foolish people,î mused Ullen. ìDey were happy just like dis when de war started and dere was a parade just like dis-and now anodder one. Silly!î He stumped back to his chair.
Johnnie followed, ìThe government is naming a new museum after you, isnít it?î
ìYes,î was the dry reply. He peered helplessly about under the desk, ìDe Ullen War Museum-and it will be filled wid ancient weapons, from stone knife to anti-aircraft gun. Dat is your queer Eard sense of de fitness of dings. Where in dunderation is dat bibliography?î
ìHere,î said Johnnie, withdrawing the document from Ullenís vest pocket. ìOur victory was due to your weapon, ancient to you, so it is fit in a way.î
ìVictory! Sure! Until Venus rearms and reprepares and refights for revenge. All history shows-but never mind. It is useless, dis talk.î He settled himself deeply in his chair, ìHere, let me show you a real victory. Let me read you some of de first volume of my work. Itís already in print, you know.î
Johnnie laughed, ìGo ahead, Ullen. Right now Iím even willing to listen to you read your entire twelve volumes- word for word.î
And Ullen smiled gently. ìIt would be good for your intellect,î he said.



***



ìHistory,î you will notice, mentions Hitlerís end. It was written in the first days of September 1940, when Hitler seemed at the very peak of his success. France was defeated and occupied and Britain was at bay and seemed unlikely to survive. -Still, I had no doubt as to his ultimate defeat. I did not visualize his ending in suicide, however. I thought that like Napoleon and the Kaiser, he would end his life in exile. Madagascar was the place I picked.
Also mentioned in the story are ìthe tiny ëDrops of Death,í the highly-publicized radioactive bombs that noiselessly and inexorably ate out a fifteen-foot crater wherever they fell.î
By the time I wrote the story, uranium fission had been discovered and announced. I had not yet heard of it, however, and I was unaware that reality was about to outstrip my prized science fictional imagination.
On October 23, 1940, I visited Campbell and outlined to him another robot story I wanted to write, a story I planned to call ìReason.î Campbell was completely enthusiastic. I had trouble writing it and had to start over several times, but eventually it was done, and on November 18 I submitted it to John. He accepted it on the twenty-second, and it appeared in the April 1941 issue of Astounding .
It was the third story of mine that he had accepted and the first in which he did not ask for a revision. (He told me, in fact, that he had liked it So well, he had almost decided to pay me a bonus.)
With ìReason,î the ìpositronic robotî series was fairly launched, and my two most successful characters yet, Gregory Powell and Mike Donovan (improvements on Turner and Snead of ìRing Around the Sunî) made their appearance. Eventually, ìReasonî and others of the series that were to follow, together with ìRobbie,î which Campbell had rejected, were to appear in I, Robot .
The success of ìReasonî didnít mean that I was to have no further rejections from Campbell.
On December 6, 1940, influenced by the season and never stopping to think that a Christmas story must sell no later than July in order to make the Christmas issue, I began ìChristmas on Ganymede.î I submitted it to him on the twenty-third, but the holiday season did not affect his critical judgment. He rejected it.
I tried Pohl next, and, as was happening so often that year, he took it. In this case, for reasons I will describe later, the acceptance fell through. I eventually sold it the next summer (June 27, 1941, the proper time of year) to Startling Stories, the younger, sister magazine of Thrilling Wonder Stories.








Christmas On Ganymede


Olaf Johnson hummed nasally to himself and his china-blue eyes were dreamy as he surveyed the stately fir tree in the corner of the library. Though the library was the largest single room in the Dome, Olaf felt it none too spacious for the occasion. Enthusiastically he dipped into the huge crate at his side and took out the first roll of red-and-green crepe paper.
What sudden burst of sentiment had inspired the Ganymedan Products Corporation, Inc. to ship a complete collection of Christmas decorations to the Dome, he did not pause to inquire. Olafís was a placid disposition, and in his self-imposed job as chief Christmas decorator, he was content with his lot.
He frowned suddenly and muttered a curse. The General Assembly signal light was Hashing on and off hysterically. With a hurt air Olaf laid down the tack-hammer he had just lifted, then the roll of crepe paper, picked some tinsel out of his hair and left for officers quarters.
Commander Scott Pelham was in his deep armchair at the head of the table when Olaf entered. His stubby fingers were drumming unrhythmically upon the glass-topped table. Olaf met the commanderís hotly furious eyes without fear, for nothing had gone wrong in his department in twenty Ganymedan revolutions.
The room filled rapidly with men, and Pelhamís eyes hardened as he counted noses in one sweeping glance.
ìWeíre all here. Men, we face a crisis!î
There was a vague stir. Olafís eyes sought the ceiling and he relaxed. Crises hit the Dome once a revolution, on the average. Usually they turned out to be a sudden rise in the quota of oxite to be gathered, or the inferior quality of the last batch of karen leaves. He stiffened, however, at the next words.
ìIn connection with the crisis, I have one question to ask.î Pelhamís voice was a deep baritone, and it rasped unpleasantly when he was angry. ìWhat dirty imbecilic troublemaker has been telling those blasted Ossies fairy tales?î
Olaf cleared his throat nervously and thus immediately became the center of attention. His Adamís apple wobbled in sudden alarm and his forehead wrinkled into a washboard. He shivered.
ìI-I-î he stuttered, quickly fell silent. His long fingers made a bewildered gesture of appeal. ìI mean I was out there yesterday, after the last-uh-supplies of karen leaves, on account the Ossies were slow and-î
A deceptive sweetness entered Pelhamís voice. He smiled.
ìDid you tell those natives about Santa Claus, Olaf?î
The smile looked uncommonly like a wolfish leer and Olaf broke down. He nodded convulsively.
ìOh, you did? Well, well, you told them about Santa Claus! He comes down in a sleigh that Hies through the air with eight reindeer pulling it, huh?î
ìWell-er-doesnít he?î Olaf asked unhappily.
ìAnd you drew pictures of the reindeer, just to make sure there was no mistake. Also, he has a long white beard and red clothes with white trimmings.î
ìYeah, thatís right,î said Olaf, his face puzzled
ìAnd he has a big bag, chock full of presents for good little boys and girls, and he brings it down the chimney and puts presents inside stockings.î
ìSure.î
ìYou also told them heís about due, didnít you? One more revolution and heís going to visit us.î
Olaf smiled weakly. ìYeah, Commander, I meant to ten you. Iím fixing up the tree and-î
ìShut up!î The commander was breathing hard in a whistling sort of way. ìDo you know what those Ossies have thought of?î
ìNo, Commander.î
Pelham leaned across the table toward Olaf and shouted:
ìThey want Santa Claus to visit them!î
Someone laughed and changed it quickly into a strangling cough at the commanderís raging stare.
ìAnd if Santa Claus doesnít visit them, the Ossies are going to quit work!î He repeated, ìQuit cold-strike!î
There was no laughter, strangled or otherwise, after that. If there were more than one thought among the entire group, it didnít show itself. Olaf expressed that thought:
ìBut what about the quota?î
ìWell, what about it?î snarled Pelham. ìDo I have to draw pictures for you? Ganymedan Products has to get one hundred tons of wolframite, eighty tons of karen leaves and fifty tons of oxite every year, or it loses its franchise. I suppose there isnít anyone here who doesnít know that. It so happens that the current year ends in two Ganymedan revolutions, and weíre five per cent behind schedule as it is.î
There was pure, horrified silence.
ìAnd now the Ossies worit work unless they get Santa Claus. No work, no quota, no franchise-no jobs! Get that, you low-grade morons. When the company loses its franchise, we lose the best-paying jobs in the System. Kiss them good-by, men, unless-î
He paused, glared steadily at Olaf, and added:
ìUnless, by next revolution, we have a flying sleigh, eight reindeer and a Santa Claus. And by every cosmic speck in the rings of Saturn, weíre going to have just that, especially a Santa!î
Ten faces turned ghastly pale.
ìGot someone in mind, Commander?î asked someone in a voice that was three-quarters croak.
ìYes, as a matter of fact, I have.î
He sprawled back in his chair. Olaf Johnson broke into a sudden sweat as he found himself staring at the end of a pointing forefinger.
ìAw, Commander!î he quavered.
The pointing finger never moved.
Pelham tramped into the foreroom, removed his oxygen nosepiece and the cold cylinders attached to it One by one he cast off thick woolen outer garments and, with a final, weary sigh, jerked off a pair of heavy knee-high space boots.
Sim Pierce paused in his careful inspection of the latest batch of karen leaves and cast a hopeful glance over his spectacles.
ìWell?î he asked.
Pelham shrugged. ìI promised them Santa. What else could I do? I also doubled sugar rations, so theyíre back on the job-for the moment.î
ìYou mean till the Santa we promised doesnít show up.î Pierce straightened and waved a long karen leaf at the commanderís face for emphasis. ìThis is the silliest thing I ever heard of. It canít be done. There ainít no Santa Claus!î
ìTry telling that to the Ossies:í Pelham slumped into a chair and his expression became stonily bleak. ìWhatís Benson doing?î
ìYou mean that flying sleigh he says he can rig up?î Pierce held a leaf up to the light and peered at it critically. ìHeís a crackpot, if you ask me. The old buzzard went down to the sub-level this morning and heís been there ever since. All I know is that heís taken the spare lectro-dissociator apart. If anything happens to the regular, it just means that weíre without oxygen.î
ìWell,î Pelham rose heavily, ìfor my part I hope we do choke. It would be an easy way out of this whole mess. Iím going down below.î
He stumped out and slammed the door behind him.
In the sub-level he gazed about in bewilderment, for the room was littered with gleaming chrome-steel machine parts. It took him some time to recognize the mess as the remains of what had been a compact, snugly built lectro-dissociator the day before. In the center, in anachronistic contrast, stood a dusty wooden sleigh atop rust-red runners. From beneath it came the sound of hammering.
ìHey, Benson!î called Pelham.
A grimy, sweat-streaked face pushed out from underneath the sleigh, and a stream of tobacco juice shot toward Bensonís ever-present cuspidor.
ìWhat are you shouting like that for?î he complained. ìThis is delicate work. ì
ìWhat the devil is that weird contraption?î demanded Pelham.
ìFlying sleigh. My own idea, too.î The light of enthusiasm shone in Bensonís watery eyes, and the quid in his mouth shifted from cheek to cheek as he spoke. ìThe sleigh was brought here in the old days, when they thought Ganymede was covered with snow like the other Jovian moons. All I have to do is fix a few gravo-repulsors from the dissociator to the bottom and thatíll make it weightless when the currentís on. Compressed air-jets will do the rest. ì
The commander chewed his lower lip dubiously.
ìWill it work?î
ìSure it will. Lots of people have thought of using repulsors in air travel, but theyíre inefficient, especially in heavy gravity fields. Here on Ganymede, with a field of one-third gravity and a thin atmosphere, a child could run it. Even Johnson could run it, though I wouldnít mourn if he fell off and broke his blasted neck.î
ìAll right, then, look here. Weíve got lots of this native purplewood. Get Charlie Finn and tell him to put that sleigh on a platform of it. Heís to have it extend about twenty feet or more frontward, with a railing around the part that projects.î
Benson spat and scowled through the stringy hair over his eyes.
ìWhatís the idea, Commander?î
Pelhamís laughter came in short, harsh barks.
ìThose Ossies are expecting reindeer, and reindeer theyíre going to have. Those animals will have to stand on something, wonít they?î
ìSureÖBut wait, hold on! There arenít any reindeer on Ganymede.î
Commander Pelham paused on his way out. His eyes narrowed unpleasantly as they always did when he thought of Olaf Johnson.
ìOlaf is out rounding up eight spinybacks for us. Theyíve got four feet, a head on one end and a tail on the other. Thatís close enough for the Ossies.î
The old engineer chewed this information and chuckled nastily.
ìGood! I wish the fool joy of his job.î
ìSo do I,î gritted Pelham.
He stalked out as Benson, still leering, slid underneath the sleigh.
The commanderís description of a spinyback was concise and accurate, but it left out several interesting details. For one thing, a spinyback has a long, mobile snout, two large ears that wave back and forth gently, and two emotional purple eyes. The males have pliable spines of a deep crimson color along the backbone that seem to delight the female of the species. Combine these with a scaly, muscular tail and a brain by no means mediocre, and you have a spinyback-or at least you have one if you can catch one.
It was just such a thought that occurred to Olaf Johnson as he sneaked down from the rocky eminence toward the herd of twenty-five spinybacks grazing on the sparse, gritty undergrowth. The nearest spinies looked up as Olaf, bundled in fur and grotesque with attached oxygen nosepiece, approached. However, spinies have no natural enemies, so they merely gazed at the figure with lanquidly disapproving eyes and returned to their crunchy but nourishing fare.
Olafís notions on bagging big game were sketchy. He fumbled in his pocket for a lump of sugar, held it out and said:
ìHere, pussy, pussy, pussy, pussy, pussy!î
The ears of the nearest spinie twitched in annoyance. Olaf came closer and held out the sugar again.
ìCome, bossy! Come. Bossy!î
The spinie caught sight of the sugar and rolled his eyes at it. His snout twitched as he spat out his last mouthful of vegetation and ambled over. With neck stretched out, he sniffed. Then, using a rapid, expert motion, he struck at the outheld palm and Hipped the lump into his mouth. Olafís other hand whistled down upon nothingness.
With a hurt expression, Olaf held out another piece. ìHere. Prince! Here, Fido!î
The spinie made a low, tremulous sound deep in his throat. It was a sound of pleasure. Evidently this strange monstrosity before him. having gone insane, intended to feed him these bits of concentrated succulence forever. He snatched and was back as quickly as the first time. But. since Olaf had held on firmly this time, the spinie almost bagged half a finger as well.
Olafís yell lacked a bit of the nonchalance necessary at such times. Nevertheless. a bite that can be felt through thick gloves is a bite!
He advanced boldly upon the spinie. There are some things that stir the Johnson blood and bring up the ancient spirit of the Vikings. Having oneís finger bitten, especially by an unearthly animal, is one of these.
There was an uncertain look in the spinieís eyes as he backed slowly away. There werenít any white cubes being offered any more and he wasnít quite sure what was going to happen now. The uncertainty vanished with a suddenness he did not expect, when two glove-muffled hands came down upon his ears and jerked. He let out a high-pitched yelp and charged forward.
A spinie has a certain sense of dignity. He doesnít like to have his ears pulled. particularly when other spinies. including several unattached females, have formed a ring and are looking on.
The Earthman went over backward and remained in that position for awhile. Meantime, the spinie backed away a few feet in a gentlemanly manner and allowed Johnson to get to his feet.
The old Viking blood frothed still higher in Olaf. After rubbing the hurt spot where he had landed on his oxygen cylinder, he jumped, forgetting to allow for Ganymedean gravity. He sailed five feet over the spinieís back.
There was awe in the animalís eye as he watched Olaf, for it was a stately jump. But there was a certain amount of bewilderment as well. There seemed to be no purpose to the maneuver.
Olaf landed on his back again and got the cylinder in the same place. He was beginning to feel a little embarrassed. The sounds that came from the circle of onlookers were remarkably like snickers.
ìLaugh!î he muttered bitterly. ìI havenít even begun to fight yet.î
He approached the spinie slowly, cautiously. He circled, watching for his opening. So did the spinie. Olaf feinted and the spinie ducked. Then the spinie reared and Olaf ducked.
Olaf kept remembering new profanity all the time. The husky ìUr-r-r-r-rî that came out the spinieís throat seemed to lack the brotherly spirit that is usually associated with Christmas.
There was a sudden, swishing sound. Olaf felt something collide with his skull, just behind his left ear. This time he turned a back somersault and landed on the nape of his neck. There was a chorused whinny from the onlookers, and the spinie waved his tail triumphantly.
Olaf got rid of the impression that he was floating through a star-studded unlimited space and wavered to his feet.
ìListen,î he objected, ìusing your tail is a foul!î
He leaped back as the tail shot forward again, then flung himself forward in a diving tackle. He grabbed at the spinieís feet and felt the animal come down on his back with an indignant yelp.
Now it was a case of Earth muscles against Ganymedan muscles, and Olaf became a man of brute strength. He struggled up, and the spinie found himself slung over the strangerís shoulders.
The spinie objected vociferously and tried to prove his objections by a judicious whip of the tail. But he was in an inconvenient position and the stroke whistled harmlessly over Olafís head.
The other spinies made way for the Earthman with saddened expressions. Evidently they were all good friends of the captured animal and hated to see him lose a fight. They returned to their meal in philosophic resignation, plainly convinced that it was kismet.
On the other side of the rocky ledge, Olaf reached his prepared cave. There was the briefest of scrambling shíuggles before he managed to sit down hard on the spinieís head and put enough knots into rope to hold him there.
A few hours later, when he had corralled his eighth spinyback, he possessed the technique that comes of long practice. He could have given a Terrestrial cowboy valuable pointers on throwing a maverick. Also, he could have given a Terrestrial stevedore lessons in simple and compound swearing.
ìTwas the night before Christmas-and all through the Ganymedan Dome there was deafening noise and bewildering excitement, like an exploding nova equipped for sound. Around the rusty sleigh, mounted on its huge platform of purplewood, five Earthmen were staging a battle royal with a spinie.
The spinie had definite views about most things, and one of his stubbornest and most definite views was that he would never go where he didnít want to go. He made that clear by flailing one head, one tail, three spines and four legs in every possible direction, with all possible force.
But the Earthmen insisted, and not gently. Despite loud, agonized squeaks, the spinie was lifted onto the platform, hauled into place and harnessed into hopeless helplessness.
ìOkay!î Peter Benson yelled. ìPass the bottle.î
Holding the spinieís snout with one hand, Benson waved the bottle under it with the other. The spinie quivered eagerly and whined tremulously. Benson poured some of the liquid down the animalís throat. There was a gurgling swallow and an appreciative whinny. The spinieís neck stretched out for more.
Benson sighed. ìOur best brandy, too.î
He up-ended the bottle and withdrew it half empty. The spinie, eyes whirling in their sockets rapidly, did what seemed an attempt at a gay jig. It didnít last long, however, for Ganymedan metabolism is almost immediately affected by alcohol. His muscles locked in a drunken rigor and, with a loud hiccup, he went out on his feet.
ìDrag out the next!î yelled Benson.
In an hour the eight spinybacks were so many cataleptic statues. Forked sticks were tied around their heads as antlers. The effect was crude and sketchy, but it would do.
As Benson opened his mouth to ask where Olaf Johnson was, that worthy showed up in the arms of three comrades, and he was putting up as stiff a fight as any spinie. His objections, however, were highly articulate.
ìIím not going anywhere in this costume!î he roared, gouging at the nearest eye. ìYou hear me?î
There certainly was cause for objection. Even at his best, Olaf had never been a heart-throb. But in his present condition, he resembled a hybrid between a spinieís nightmare and a Picassian conception of a patriarch.
He wore the conventional costume of Santa. His clothes were as red as red tissue paper sewed onto his space coat could make it. The ìermineî was as white as cotton wool, which it was. His beard, more cotton wool glued into a linen foundation, hung loosely from his ears. With that below and his oxygen nosepiece above, even the strongest were forced to avert their eyes.
Olaf had not been shown a mirror. But, between what he could see of himself and what his instinct told him, he would have greeted a good, bright lightning bolt like a brother.
By fits and starts, he was hauled to the sleigh. Others pitched in to help, until Olaf was nothing but a smothered squirm and muffled voice.
ìLeggo,î he mumbled. ìLeggo and come at me one by one. Come on!î
He tried to spar a bit, to point his dare. But the multiple grips upon him left him unable to wriggle a finger.
ìGet in!î ordered Benson.
ìYou go to hell!î gasped Olaf. ìIím not getting into any patented short-cut to suicide, and you can take your bloody flying sleigh and-ì
ìListen,î interrupted Benson, ìCommander Pelham is waiting for you at the other end. Heíll skin you alive if you donít show up in half an hour.î
ìCommander Pelham can take the sleigh sideways and-î
ìThen think of your job! Think of a hundred and fifty a week. Think of every other year off with pay. Think of Hilda, back on Earth, who isnít going to marry you without a job. Think of all that!î
Johnson thought, snarled. He thought some more, got into the sleigh, strapped down his bag and turned on the gravo-repulsors. With a horrible curse, he opened the rear jet.
The sleigh dashed forward and he caught himself from going backward, over and out of the sleigh, by two-thirds of a whisker. He held onto the sides thereafter, watching the surrounding hills as they rose and fell with each lurch of the unsteady sleigh.
As the wind rose, the undulations grew more marked. And when Jupiter came up, its yellow light brought out every jag and crag of the rocky ground, toward everyone of which, in turn, the sleigh seemed headed. And by the time the giant planet had shoved completely over the horizon, the curse of drink-which departs from the Ganymedan organism just as quickly as it descends-began removing itself from the spinies.
The hindmost spinie came out of it first, tasted the inside of his mouth, winced and swore off drink. Having made that resolution, he took in his immediate surroundings languidly. They made no immediate impression on him. Only gradually was the fact forced upon him that his footing, whatever it was, was not the usual stable one of solid Ganymede. It swayed and shifted, which seemed very unusual.
Yet he might have attributed this unsteadiness to his recent orgy, had he not been so careless as to drop his glance over the railing to which he was anchored. No spinie ever died of heart-failure, as far as is recorded, but, looking downward, this one almost did.
His agonized screech of horror and despair brought the other spinies into full, if headachy, consciousness. For a while there was a confused blur of squawking conversation as the animals tried to get the pain out of their heads and the facts in. Both aims were achieved and a stampede was organized. It wasnít much of a stampede, because the spinies were anchored tightly. But, except for the fact that they got nowhere, they went through all the motions of a full gallop. And the sleigh went crazy.
Olaf grabbed his beard a second before it let go of his ears.
ìHey!î he shouted.
It was something like saying ìTut, tutî to a hurricane.
The sleigh kicked, bucked and did a hysterical tango. It made sudden spurts, as if inspired to dash its wooden brains out against Ganymedeís crust. Meanwhile Olaf prayed, swore, wept and jiggled all the compressed air jets at once.
Ganymede whirled and Jupiter was a wild blur. Perhaps it was the spectacle of Jupiter doing the shimmy that steadied the spinies. More likely it was the fact that they just didnít give a hang any more. Whatever it was, they halted, made lofty farewell speeches to one another, confessed their sins and waited for death.
The sleigh steadied and Olaf resumed his breathing once more. Only to stop again as he viewed the curious spectacle of hills and solid ground up above, and black sky and swollen Jupiter down below.
It was at this point that he, too, made his peace with the eternal and awaited the end.
ìOssieî is short for ostrich, and thatís what native Ganymedans look like, except that their necks are shorter, their heads are larger, and their feathers look as if they were about to fall out by the roots. To this, add a pair of scrawny, feathered arms with three stubby fingers apiece. They can speak English, but when you hear them, you wish they couldnít
There were fifty of them in the low purplewood structure that was their ìmeeting hall.î On the mound of raised dirt in the front of the room-dark with the smoky dimness of burning purplewood torches fetid to boot-sat Commander Scott Pelham and five of his men. Before them strutted the frowziest Ossie of them all, inflating his huge chest with rhythmic, booming sounds.
He stopped for a moment and pointed to a ragged hole in the ceiling.
ìLook!î he squawked. ìChimney. We make. Sannycaws come in.î
Pelham grunted approval. The Ossie clucked happily. He pointed to the little sacks of woven grass that hung from the walls.
ìLook! Stockies. Sannycaws put presets!î
ìYeah,î said Pelham unenthusiastically. ìChimney and stockings. Very nice.î He spoke out of the corner of his mouth to Sim Pierce, who sat next to him: ìAnother half-hour in this dump will kill me. When is that fool coming?î
Pierce stirred uneasily.
ìListen,î he said, ìIíve been doing some figuring. Weíre safe on everything but the karen leaves, and weíre still four tons short on that If we can get this fool business over with in the next hour, so we can start the next shift and work the Ossies at double, we can make itî He leaned back ìYes, I think we can make itî
ìJust about,î replied Pelham gloomily. ìThatís if Johnson gets here without pulling another bloomer.î
The Ossie was talking again, for Ossies like to talk He said:
ìEvery year Kissmess comes. Kissmess nice, evvybody friendly. Ossie like Kissmess. You like Kissmess?î
ìYeah, fine,î Pelham snarled politely. ìPeace on Ganymede, good will toward men-especially Johnson. Where the devil is that idiot, anyhow?î
He fell into an annoyed fidget, while the Ossie jumped up and down a few times in a thoughtful sort of manner, evidently for the exercise of it. He continued the jumping, varying it with little hopping dance steps, till Pelhamís fists began making strangling gestures. Only an excited squawk from the hole in the wall dignified by the term ìwindowî kept Pelham from committing Ossie-slaughter.
Ossies swarmed about and the Earthmen fought for a view.
Against Jupiterís great yellowness was outlined a flying sleigh, complete with reindeers. It was only a tiny thing, but there was no doubt about it. Santa Claus was coming.
There was only one thing wrong with the picture. The sleigh, ìreindeerî and all, while plunging ahead at a terrific speed, was flying upside down.
The Ossies dissolved into squawking cacophony. ìSannycaws! Sannycaws! Sannycaws!î
They scrambled out the window like so many animated dust-mops gone mad. Pelham and his men used the low door.
The sleigh was approaching, growing larger, lurching from side to side and vibrating like an off-center flywheel. Olaf Johnson was a tiny figure holding on desperately to the side of the sleigh with both hands.
Pelham was shouting wildly, incoherently, choking on the thin atmosphere every time he forgot to breathe through his nose. Then he stopped and stared in horror. The sleigh, almost life-size now, was dipping down. If it had been an arrow shot by William Tell, it could not have aimed between Pelhamís eyes more accurately.
ìEverybody down!î he shrieked, and dropped.
The wind of the sleighís passage whistled keenly and brushed his face. Olafís voice could be heard for an instant, high-pitched and indistinct. Compressed air spurted, leaving tracks of condensing water vapor.
Pelham lay quivering, hugging Ganymedeís frozen crust. Then, knees shaking like a Hawaiian hula-girl, he rose slowly. The Ossies who had scattered before the plunging vehicle had assembled again. Off in the distance, the sleigh was veering back.
Pelham watched as it swayed and hovered, still rotating. It lurched toward the dome, curved off to one side, turned back, and gathered speed.
Inside that sleigh, Olaf worked like a demon. Straddling his legs wide, he shifted his weight desperately. Sweating and cursing, trying hard not to look ìdownwardî at Jupiter, he urged the sleigh into wilder and wilder swings. It was wobbling through an angle of 180 degrees now, and Olaf felt his stomach raise strenuous objections.
Holding his breath, he leaned hard with his right foot and felt the sleigh swing far over. At the extremity of that swing, he released the gravo-repulsor and, in Ganymedeís weak gravity, the sleigh jerked downward. Naturally, since the vehicle was bottom-heavy due to the metal gravo-repulsor beneath, it righted itself as it fell.
But this was little comfort to Commander Pelham, who found himself once more in the direct path of the sleigh.
ìDown!î he yelled, and dropped again.
The sleigh whi-i-ished overhead, came up against a huge boulder with a crack, bounced twenty-five feet into the air, came down with a rush and a bang, and Olaf fell over the railing and out.
Santa Claus had arrived.
With a deep, shuddering breath, Olaf swung his bag over his shoulders, adjusted his beard and patted one of the silently suffering spinies on the head. Death might be coming-in fact, Olaf could hardly wait-but he was going to die on his feet nobly, like a Johnson.
Inside the shack, into which the Ossies had once more swarmed, a thump announced the arrival of Santaís bag on the roof, and a second thud the arrival of Santa himself. A ghastly face appeared through the makeshift hole in the ceiling.
ìMerry Christmas!î it croaked, and tumbled through. Olaf landed on his oxygen cylinders, as usual, and got them in the usual place.
The Ossies jumped up and down like rubber balls with the itch.
Olaf limped heavily toward the first stocking and deposited the garishly colored sphere he withdrew from his bag, one of the many that had originally been intended as a Christmas tree ornament One by one he deposited the rest in every available stocking.
Having completed his job, he dropped into an exhausted squat, from which position he watched subsequent proceedings with a glazed and fishy eye. The jolliness and belly-shaking good humor, traditionally characteristic of Santa Claus, were absent from this one with remarkable thoroughness.
The Ossies made up for it by their wild ecstasy. Until Olaf had deposited the last globe, they had kept their silence and their seats. But when he had finished, the air heaved and writhed under the stresses of the discordant screeches that arose. In half a second the hand of each Ossie contained a globe.
They chattered among themselves furiously, handling the globes carefully and hugging them close to their chests. Then they compared one with another) flocking about to gaze at particularly good ones.
The frowziest Ossie approached Pelham and plucked at the commanderís sleeve. ìSannycaws good)î he cackled. ìLook, he leave eggs Iî He stared reverently at his sphere and said: ìPittierín Ossie eggs. Must be Sannycaws eggs, huh?î
His skinny finger punched Pelham in the stomach.
ìNo!î yowled Pelham vehemently. ìHell, no!î
But the Ossie wasnít listening. He plunged the globe deep into the warmth of his feathers and said:
ìPitty colors. How long take for little Sannycaws come out? And what little Sannycaws eat?î He looked up. ìWe take good care. We teach little Sannycaws) make him smart and full of brain like Ossie.î
Pierce grabbed Commander Pelhamís arm.
ìDonít argue with them)Ö he whispered frantically. ìWhat do you care if they think those are Santa Claus eggs? Come on! If we work like maniacs) we can still make the quota. Lets get started.î
ìThatís right,î Pelham admitted. He turned to the Ossie. ìTell everyone to get going.î He spoke clearly and loudly. ìWork now. Do you understand? Hurry) hurry) hurry! Come on!î
He motioned with his arms. But the frowzy Ossie had come to a sudden halt. He said slowly:
ìWe work, but Johnson say Kissmess come evvy yearÖ
ìIsnít one Christmas enough for you?î Pelham rasped.
ìNo!î squawked the Ossie. ìWe want Sannycaws next year. Get more eggs. And next year more eggs. And next year. And next year) And next year. More eggs. More little Sannycaws eggs. If Sannycaws not come) we not work.î
ìThatís a long time off,Ö said Pelham. ìWeíll talk about it then. By that time Iíll either have gone completely crazy) or youíll have forgotten all about itÖ
Pierce opened his mouth, closed it, opened his mouth, closed it, opened it, and finally managed to speak.
ìCommander, they want him to come every yearÖ
ìI know. They wonít remember by next year, thoughÖ
ìBut you donít get it. A year to them is one Ganymedan revolution around Jupiter. In Earth time, thatís seven days and three hours. They want Santa Claus to come every weekÖ
ìEvery week!î Pelham gulped. ìJohnson told them-î
For a moment everything turned sparkling somersaults before his eyes. He choked, and automatically his eye sought Olaf.
Olaf turned cold to the marrow of his bones and rose to his feet apprehensively, sidling toward the door. There he stopped as a sudden recollection of tradition hit him. Beard a-dangle, he croaked:
ìMerry Christmas to all, and to all a good night!î
He made for the sleigh as if all the imps of Hades were after him. The imps werenít, but Commander Scott Pelham was.



***



In January of 1941 (the month in which I attained my majority), I undertook something new-a collaboration.
Fred Pohl, after all, was not merely an editor. He was also a budding writer. He has since come to be a giant in the field, but in those early days he was struggling along with only the sort of meager success I was having. Alone, and in collaboration with other Futurians, he turned out stories under a variety of pseudonyms. The one he used most frequently was ìJames MacCreigh.î
As it happened, he had written, under that pseudonym, a small fantasy called ìThe Little Man on the Subway,î which he apparently had hopes for but couldnít get right. He asked me if I would rewrite it, and the request flattered me. Besides, I was still trying to get into Unknown, and if I couldnít do it on my own, maybe I could do it by way of a collaboration. I wasnít proud-at least as far as fantasy was concerned.
I took on the task and did it virtually at a sitting. Doing it easily didnít help, however. I submitted it to Campbell for Unknown on January 27, 1941, and he rejected it. I had to hand it back to Pohl.
Pohl, however, with the true agentís soul, never gave up, and in 1950, long after I had utterly forgotten it, he managed to place it with a small magazine called Fantasy Book.








The Little Man on the Subway






(with James MacCreigh)



Subway stations are places where people usually get out, so when no one left the first car at Atlantic Avenue station, Conductor Cullen of the I.R. T. began to get worried. In fact, no one had left the first car from the time the run to Flatbush had begun-though dozens were getting on all the time.
Odd! Very odd! It was the kind of proposition that made well-bred conductors remove their caps and scratch their heads. Conductor Cullen did so. It didnít help, but he repeated the process at Bergen Street, the next station, where again the first car lost not one of its population. And at Grand Army Plaza, he added to the head-scratching process a few rare old Gaelic words that had passed down from father to son for hundreds of years. They ionized the surrounding atmosphere, but otherwise did not affect the situation.
At Eastern Parkway, Cullen tried an experiment. He carefully refrained from opening the first carís doors at all. He leaned forward eagerly, twisted his head and watched-and was treated to nothing short of a miracle. The New York subway rider is neither shy, meek, nor modest, and doors that do not open immediately or sooner are helped on their way by sundry kicks. But this time there was not a kick, not a shriek, not even a modified yell. Cullenís eyes popped.
He was getting angry. At Franklin Avenue, where he again contacted the Express, he flung open the doors and swore at the crowd. Every door spouted commuters of both sexes and all ages, except that terrible first car. At those doors, three men and a very young girl got on, though Cullen could plainly see the slight bulging of the walls that the already super-crowded condition of the car had caused.
For the rest of the trip to Flatbush Avenue, Cullen ignored the first car completely, concentrating on that last stop where everyone would have to get off. Everyone! President, Church, and Beverly Road were visited and passed, and Cullen found himself counting the stations to the Flatbush terminus.
They seemed like such a nice bunch of passengers, too. They read their newspapers, stared into the whirling blackness out the window, or at the girlís legs across the way, or at nothing at all, quite like ordinary people. Only, they didnít want to get out. They didnít even want to get into the next car, where empty seats filled the place. Imagine New Yorkers resisting the impulse to pass from one car to the other, and missing the chance to leave the doors open for the benefit of the draft.
But it was Flatbush Avenue! Cullen rubbed his hands, slammed the doors open and yelled in his best unintelligible manner, ìLasstop!î He repeated it two or three times hoarsely and several in that damned first car looked up at him. There was reproach in their eyes. Have you never heard of the Mayorís anti-noise campaign, they seemed to say.
The last other passenger had come out of the train, and the scattered new ones were coming in. There were a few curious looks at the jammed car, but not too many. The New Yorker considers everything he cannot understand a publicity stunt.
Cullen fell back on his Gaelic once more and dashed up the platform toward the motormanís booth. He needed moral assistance. The motorman should have been out of his cab, preparing for his next trip, but he wasnít. Cullen could see him through the glass of the door, leaning on the controls and staring vacantly at the bumper-stop ahead.
ìGus!î cried Cullen. ìCome out! Thereís a hell of-î
At that point, his tongue skidded to a halt, because it wasnít Gus. It was a little old man, who smiled politely and twiddled his fingers in greeting.
Patrick Cullenís Irish soul rebelled. With a yelp, he grabbed the edge of the door and tried to shove it open. He should have known that wouldnít work. So, taking a deep breath and commending said Irish soul to God, he made for the open door and ploughed into the mass of haunted humans in that first car. Momentum carried him six feet, and then there he stuck. Behind him, those he had knocked down picked themselves up from the laps of their fellow-travelers, apologized with true New York courtesy (consisting of a growl, a grunt, and a grimace) and returned to their papers.
Then, caught helplessly, he heard the Dispatcherís bell. It was time for his own train to be on its way. Duty called! With a superhuman effort, he inched towards the door, but it closed before he could get there, and the train commenced to move.
It occurred to Cullen that he had missed a report for the first time, and he said, ìDamn!î After the train had travelled some fifty feet, it came to him that they were going the wrong way, and this time he said nothing.
After all, what was there to say-even in the purest of Gaelic.
How could a train go the wrong way at Flatbush Ave. There were no further tracks. There was no further tunnel. There was a bumper-stop to prevent eccentric motormen from trying to bore one. It was absurd. Even the Big Deal couldnít do it.
But there they were!
There were stations in this new tunnel, too,-cute little small ones just large enough for one car. But that was all right, because only one car was travelling. The rest had somehow become detached, presumably to make the routine trip to Bronx Park.
There were maybe a dozen stations on the line-with curious names. Cullen noticed only a few, because he found it difficult to keep his eyes from going out of focus. One was Archangel Boulevard; another Seraph Road; still another Cherub Plaza.
And then, the train slid into a monster station, that looked uncommonly like a cave, and stopped. It was huge, about three hundred feet deep, and almost spherical. The tracks ran to the exact center, without trusses, and the platform at its side likewise rested comfortably upon air.
The conductor was the only person left in the car, the rest having mostly gotten off at Hosannah Square. He hung limply from the porcelain hand-grip, staring fixedly at a lip-stick advertisement. The door of the motonnanís cabin opened and the little man came out. He glanced at Cullen, turned away, then whirled back.
ìHey,î he said, ìwho are you?î
Cullen rotated slowly, still clutching the hand-grip. ìOnly the conductor. Donít mind me. Iím quitting anyway. I donít like the work.î
ìOh, dear, dear, this is unexpected.î The little man waggled his head and tch-tched. ìIím Mr. Crumley,î he explained. ìI steal things. People mostly. Sometimes subway cars,-but theyíre such big, clumsy things, donít you think?î
ìMister,î groaned Cullen. ìI quit thinking two hours ago. It didnít get me anywhere. Who are you, anyway?î
ìI told you-Iím Mr. Crumley. Iím practicing to be a god.î
ìA gob?î said Cullen. ìYou mean a sailor?î
ìDear, no,î frowned Mr. Crumley. ìI said, ëgod,í as in Jehovah. Look!î He pointed out the window to the wall of the cave. Where his finger pointed, the rock billowed and rose. He moved his finger and there was a neat ridge of rock describing a reversed, lower case ìh.î
ìThatís my symbol,î said Crumley modestly. ìMystic, isnít it? But thatís nothing. Wait till I really get things organized. Dear, dear, will I give them miracles!î
Cullenís head swivelled between the raised-rock symbol and the simpering Mr. Crumley, until he began to get dizzy, and then he stopped.
ìListen,î he demanded hoarsely. ìHow did you get that car out of Flatbush Avenue? Where did that tunnel come from? Are some of them foreigners-î
ìOh, my, no!î answered Mr. Crumley. ìI made that myself and willed it so that no one would notice. It was quite difficult. It just wears the ectoplasm right out of me. Miracles with people mixed up in it are much harder than the other kind, because you have to fight their wills. Unless you have lots of Believers, you canít do it. Now that Iíve got over a hundred thousand, I can do it, but there was a time,î he shook his head reminiscently, ìwhen I couldnít even have levitated a baby-or healed a leper. Oh, well, weíre wasting time. We ought to be at the nearest factory.î
Cullen brightened. ëFactoryí was more prosaic. ìI once had a brother,î he said, ìwho worked in a sweater factory, but-î
ìOh, goodness, Mr. Cullen. Iím referring to my Believersí Factories. I have to educate people to believe in me, donít I, and preaching is such slow work. I believe in mass production. Some day I intend to be called the Henry Ford of Utopia. Why, Iíve got twelve Factories in Brooklyn alone and when I manufacture enough Believers, Iíll just cover the world with them.î
He sighed, ìGracious me, if I only had enough Believers. Iíve got to have a million before I can let things progress by themselves and until then I have to attend to every little detail myself. It is so boring! I even have to keep reminding my Believers who I am-even the Disciples. Incidentally, Cullen,-I read your mind, by the way, so thatís how I know your name-you want to be a Believer, of course.î
ìWell, now,î said Cullen nervously.
ìOh, come now. Some gods would have been angry at your intrusion and done away with you,î he snapped his fingers, ìlike that. Not I, though, because I think killing people is messy and inconsiderate. Just the same, youíll have to be a Believer.î
Now Patrick Cullen was an intelligent Irishman. That is to say, he admitted the existence of banshees, leprechauns, and the Little Folk, and kept an open mind on poltergeists, werewolves, vampires and such-like foreign trash. At mere supernaturalities, he was too well educated to sneer. Still, Cullen did not intend to compromise his religion. His theology was weak, but for a mortal to claim godship smacked of heresy, not to say sacrilege and blasphemy, even to him.
ìYouíre a faker,î he cried boldly, ìand youíre headed straight for Hell the way youíre going.î
Mr. Crumley clicked his tongue, ìWhat terrible language you use. And so unnecessary! Of course you Believe in me.î
ìOh, yeah?î
ìWell, then, if you are stubborn, Iíll pass a minor miracle. Its inconvenient, but now,î he made vague motions with his left hand, ìyou Believe in me.î
ìCertainly,î said Cullen, hurt. ìI always did. How do I go about worshipping you? I want to do this properly.î
ìJust Believe in me, and thatís enough. Now you must go to the factories and then weíll send you back home-theyíll never know you were gone-and you can live your life like a Believer.î
The conductor smiled ecstatically, ìOh, happy life! I want to go to the factories.î
ìOf course you would,î replied Mr. Crumley. ìYouíd be a fine Crumleyite otherwise, wouldnít you? Come!î He pointed at the door of the car, and the door slid open. They walked out and Crumley kept on pointing. Rock faded away in front, and bit down again behind. Through the wall Cullen walked, following that little figure who was his god.
That was a god, thought Cullen. Any god that could do that was one hell of a damn good god to believe in.
And then he was at the factory-in another cave, only smaller. Mr. Crumley seemed to like caves.
Cullen didnít pay much attention to his surroundings. He couldnít see much anyway on account of the faint violet mist that blurred his vision. He got the impression of a slowly-moving conveyor belt, with men stationed at intervals along it. Disciples, he thought. And the parts being machined on that belt were probably non-Believers, or such low trash.
There was a man watching him, smiling. A Disciple, Cullen thought, and quite naturally made the sign to him. He had never made it before, but it was easy. The Disciple replied in kind.
ìHe told me you were coming,î said the Disciple. ìHe made a special miracle for you, he said. Thatís quite a distinction. Do you want me to show you around the belt?î
ìYou bet.î
ìWell, this is Factory One. Itís the nerve center of all the factories of the country. The others give preliminary treatment only; and make only Believers. We make Disciples.î
Oh, boy, Disciples! ìAm I going to be a Discipler asked Cullen eagerly.
ìAfter being miraculated by him. Of course! Youíre a somebody, you know. There are only five other people he ever took personal charge of.î
This was a glorious way to do things. Everything Mr. Crumley did was glorious. What a god! What a god!
ìYou started that way, too.î
ìCertainly,î said the Disciple, placidly, ìIím an important fellow, too. Only I wish I were more important, even.î
ìWhat for?î said Cullen, in a shocked tone of voice. ì Are you murmuring against the dictates of Mr. Crumley? (may he prosper).This is sacrilege.î
The Disciple shifted uncomfortably, ìWell, Iíve got ideas, and Iíd like to try them out.î
ìYouíve got ideas, huh?î muttered Cullen balefully. ìDoes Mr. Crumley (may he live forever) know?î
ìWell-frankly, no! But just the same,î the Disciple looked over each shoulder carefully and drew closer, ìIím not the only one. There are lots of us that think Mr. Crumley (on whom be blessings) is just a trifle old-fashioned. For instance, take the lights in this place.î
Cullen stared upwards. The lights were the same type as those in the terminal-cave. They might have been stolen from any line of the IRT subway. Perfect copies of the stop-and-go signals and the exit markers.
ìWhatís wrong?î he asked.
The Disciple sneered, ìThey lack originality. Youíd think a grade A god would do something new. When he takes people, he does it through the subway, and he obeys subway rules. He waits for the Dispatcher to tell him to go; he stops at every station; he uses crude electricity and so on. What we need,î the Disciple was waving his hands wildly and shouting, ìis more enterprise, more git-and-go. Weíve got to speed up things and run them with efficiency and vim.î
Cullen stared hotly, ìYou are a heretic,î he accused. ìyou are doomed to damnation.î He looked angrily about for a bell, whistle, gong, or drum wherewith to summon the great Crumley, but found nothing.
The other blinked in quick thought. ìSay,î he said, bluffly, ìlook at what time it is. Iím behind schedule. You better get on the belt for your first treatment.î
Cullen was hot about the slovenly assistance Mr. Crumley was getting from this inferior Disciple, but a treatment is a treatment, so making the sign devoutly, he got on. He found it fairly comfortable despite its jerky motion. The Disciple motioned to Cullenís first preceptor-another Disciple-standing beside a sort of blackboard. Cullen had watched others while discussing Crumley and he had noticed the question and answer procedure that had taken place. He had noticed it particularly.
Consequently, he was surprised, when the second Disciple, instead of using his heavy pointer to indicate a question on the board, reversed it and brought it down upon his head.
The lights went out!
When he came to, he was under the belt, at the very bottom of the cave. He was tied up, and the Rebellious Disciple and three others were talking about him.
ìHe couldnít be persuaded,î the Disciple was saying. ìCrumley must have given him a double treatment or something.î
ìItís the last double treatment Crumleyíll ever give,î said the fat little man.
ìLetís hope so. Howís it coming?î
ìVery well. Very well, indeed. We teleported ourselves to Section Four about two hours ago. It was a perfect miracle.î
The Disciple was pleased. ìFine! Howíre they doing at Four?î
The fat little man clucked his lips. COW ell, now, not so hot. For some reason, theyíre getting odd effects over there. Miracles are just happening. Even ordinary Crumleyites can pass them, and sometimes they-just happen. Itís extremely annoying.î
ìHmm, thatís bad. If there are too many hitches, Crumleyíll get suspicious. ti he investigates there first, he can reconvert all of them in a jiffy, before he comes here and then without their support we might not be strong enough to stand up against him.î
ìSay, now,î said the fat man apprehensively, ìweíre not strong enough now, you mow. None of this going off half-cocked.î
ìWeíre strong enough,î pointed out the Disciple stiffly, ìto weaken him long enough to get us a new god started, and after that-
ìA new god, eh?î said another. He nodded wisely.
ìSure,î said the Disciple. ì A new god, created by us, can be destroyed by us. Heíd be completely under our thumb and then instead of this one-man tyranny, we can have a sort of-er-council.î
There were general grins and everyone looked pleased.
ìBut weíll discuss that further some other time,î continued the Disciple briskly. ìLetís Believe just a bit. Crumley isnít stupid, you mow, and we donít want him to observe any slackening. Come on, now. All together.î
They closed their eyes, concentrated a bit, and then opened them with a sigh.
ìWell,î said the little, fat man, ì thatís over. Iíd better be getting back now.î
From under the belt, Cullen watched him. He looked singularly like a chicken about to take off for a tree as he flexed his knees and stared upwards. Then he added to the resemblance not a little when he spread his arms, gave a little hop and fluttered away.
Cullen could follow his flight only by watching the eyes of the three remaining. Those eyes turned up and up, following the fat man to the very top of the cave, it seemed. There was an air of self-satisfaction about those eyes. They were very happy over their miracles.
Then they all went away and left Cullen to his holy indignation. He was shocked to the very core of his being at this sinful rebellion, this apostasy-this-this-There werenít any words for it, even when he tried Gaelic.
Imagine trying to create a god that would be under the thumbs of the creators. It was anthropomorphic heresy (where had he heard that word, now?) and struck at the roots of all religion. Was he going to lie there and watch anything strike at the roots of all religion? Was he going to submit to having MI. Crumley (may he swim through seas of ecstasy) deposed?
Never!
But the ropes thought otherwise, so there he stayed.
And then there was an interruption in his thoughts. There came a low, booming sound-a sound which would have been a voice if it had not been pitched so incredibly low. There was a menace to it that got immediate attention. It got attention from Cullen, who quivered in his bonds; from the others in the cave, who quivered even harder, not being restrained by ropes; from the belt itself, which stopped dead with a jerk, and quivered mightily.
The Rebellious Disciple dropped to his knees and quivered more than any of them.
The voice came again, this time in a recognizable language, ìWHERE IS THAT BUM, CRUMLEY?î it roared.
There was no wait for an answer. A cloud of shadow gathered in the center of the hall and spat a black bolt at the belt. A spot of fire leaped out from where the bolt had touched and spread slowly outward. Where it passed, the belt ceased to exit. It was far from Cullen, but there were humans nearer, and among those scurrying pandemonium existed.
Cullen wanted very much to join the flight, but unfortunately the Disciple who had trussed him up had evidently been a Boy Scout. Jerking, twisting, and writhing had no effect upon the stubborn ropes, so he fell back upon Gaelic and wishing. He wished he were flee. He wished he werenít tied. He wished he were far away from that devouring flame. He wished lots of things, some unprintable, but mainly those.
And with that he felt a gentle slipping pressure and down at his feet was an untidy pile of hempen fibre. Evidently the forces liberated by the rebellion were getting out of control here as well as in Section Four. What had the little fat man said? ìMiracles are just happening. Even ordinary Crumleyites can pass them, and sometimes they-just happen.î
But why waste time? He ran to the rock wall and howled a wish at it to dissolve into nothing. He howled several times with Gaelic modifications, but the wall didnít even slightly soften. He stared wildly and then saw the hole. It was on the side of the cave, diametrically across from Cullenís position at the bottom of the hall, and about three loops of the belt up. The upward spiral passed just below it.
Somehow he made the leap that grabbed the lower lip of the spiral, wriggled his way onto it and jumped into a run. The fire of disintegration was behind him and plenty far away, but it was making time. Up the belt to the third loop he ran, not taking time to be dizzy from the circular trip. But when he got there, the hole, large, black and inviting, was just the tiniest bit higher than he could jump.
He leaned against the wall panting. The spot of fire was now two spots, crawling both ways from a twenty foot break in the belt. Everyone in the cavern, some two hundred people, was in motion, and everyone made some sort of noise.
Somehow, the sight stimulated him. It nerved him to further efforts to get into the hole. Wildly, he tried walking up the sheer wall, but this didnít work.
And then Mr. Crumley stuck his head out of the hole and said, ìOh, mercy me, what a perfectly terrible mess. Dear, dear! Come up here, Cullen! Why do you stay down there!î
A great peace descended upon Cullen. ìHail, Mr. Crumley,î he cried. ìMay you sniff the essence of roses forever.î
Mr. Crumley looked pleased, ìThank you, Cullen.î He waved his hand, and the conductor was beside him-a simple matter of levitation. Once again, Cullen decided in his inmost soul that here was a god.
ìAnd now,î said Mr. Crumley, ìwe must hurry, hurry, hurry. Iíve lost most of my power when the Disciples rebelled, and my subway car is stuck half-way. Iíll need your help. Hurry!î
Cullen had no time to admire the tiny subway at the end of the tunnel. He jumped off the platform on Crumleyís heels and dashed about a hundred feet down the tube to where the car was standing idle. He wafted into the open front door with the grace of a chorusboy. Mr. Crumley took care of that.
ìCullen,î said Mr. Crumley, ìstart this thing and take it back to the regular line. And be careful; he is waiting for me.î
ìWho?î
ìHe, the new god. Imagine those fools-no, idiots-thinking they could create a controllable god, when the very essence of godship is uncontrollability. of course, when they made a god to destroy me, they made a Destroyer, and heíll just destroy everything in sight that I created, including my Disciples.î
Cullen worked quickly. He knew how to start car 30990; any conductor would. He raced to the other end of the car for the control lever, snatched it off, and returned at top speed. That was all he needed. There was power in the rail; the lights were on; and there were no stop signals between him and Godís Country.
Mr. Crumley lay himself down on a seat, ìBe very quiet. He may let you get past him. Iím going to blank myself out, and maybe he wonít notice me. At any rate, he wonít harm you-I hope. Dear, dear, since this all started in section four, things are such a mess.î
Eight stations passed before anything happened and then came Utopia Circle station and-well, nothing really happened. It was just an impression-an impression of people all around him for a few seconds watching him closely with a virulent hostility. It wasnít exactly people, but a person. It wasnít exactly a person either, but just a huge eye, watching-watching-watching.
But it passed, and almost immediately Cullen saw a black and white ìFlatbush Avenueî sign at the side of the tunnel. He jammed on his brakes in a hurry, for there was a train waiting there. But the controls didnít work the way they should have, and the car edged up until it was in contact with the cars before. With a soft click, it coupled and 30900 was just the last car of the train.
It was Mr. Crumleyís work, of course. Mr. Crumley stood behind him, watching. ìHe didnít get you, did he? No-I see he didnít.î
ìIs there any more danger?î asked Cullen, anxiously.
ìI donít think so,î responded Mr. Crumley sadly. ìAfter he has destroyed all my creation, there will be nothing left for him to destroy, and, deprived of a function, he will simply cease to exist. Thatís the result of this nasty, slipshod work. Iím disgusted with human beings.î
ìDonít say that, ì said Cullen.
ìI will,î reported Mr. Crumley savagely, ìHuman beings arenít fit to be god of. Theyíre too much trouble and worry. It would give any self-respecting god grey hairs and I suppose you think a god looks very dignified all grey. Darn all humans! They can get along without me. From now on, Iím going to go to Africa and try the chimpanzees. Iíll bet they make much better material.î
ìBut wait, ì wailed Cullen. ìWhat about me? I believe in you.î
ìOh, dear, that would never do. Here! Return to normal.î
Mr. Crumleyís hand caressed the air, and Cullen, once more a God-fearing Irishman, let loose a roar in the purest Gaelic and made for him.
ìWhy, you blaspheming spalpeen-î
But there was no Mr. Crumley. There was only the Dispatcher, asking very impolitely-in English-what the blankety-blank hell was the matter with him.



***



I am sorry to say that I have no clear memory, at this time, what parts of the story are mine and what parts are Pohlís. Going over it, I can say, ìThis part sounds like me, this part doesnít,î but whether Iíd be right or not I couldnít swear.
 Fantasy Book was a very borderline publication that lasted only eight issues. ìThe Little Man on the Subwayî was in the sixth.
An amusing fact about this issue of a small magazine that had to make do with what it could find among the rejects of the field was that it included ìScanners Live in Vain,Ö by Cordwainer Smith. This was Smithís first published story and he was not to publish another for eight years or so. In the 1960s, Smith (a pseudonym for a man whose real identity was not made clear until after his death) became a writer of considerable importance, and this first story of his became a classic.
While working on ìThe Little Man on the Subwayî I was also doing another ìpositronic robotî story, called ìLiar!î In this one, my character Susan Calvin first appeared (she has been a character in ten of my stories up to the present time and I donít eliminate the possibility that she will appear yet again).
It was while Campbell and I were discussing this story, by the way, on December 16, 1940, that the ìThree Laws of Roboticsî were worked out in full. (I say it was Campbell who worked them out and he says it was I-but I know Iím right. It was he.)
ìLiar!î was accepted at once by Campbell, at the end of January, without revision, and appeared in the May 1941 issue of Astounding. It was my fourth appearance in that magazine. The fact that it appeared the month after ìReasonî helped fix the ìpositronic robotî stories in the readersí minds as a ìseriesÖ ìLiar!î eventually appeared in I, Robot.
The sale of two ìpositronic robotî stories, ìReasonî and ìLiar!î virtually back to back put me all on fire to do more of the same. When I suggested still another story of the sort to Campbell on February 3, 1941, he approved, but he said he didnít want me, this early in the game, tying myself down too completely into a rigid formula. He suggested I do other kinds of stories first. I was a good boy; I obeyed.
On that very day, in fact, I decided to try fantasy again. I wrote a short one (1,500 words) called ìMasks,î and heaven only knows what it was about, for I donít. I submitted it to Campbell for Unknown on February 10, and he rejected it. It is gone; it no longer exists.
Later that month I also wrote a short story called ìThe Hazing,î intended for Pohl. I submitted it to him on February 24, and he rejected it at once. Eventually I submitted it to Thrilling Wonder Stories. They requested a revision, I obliged, and they accepted it on July 2 9, 1941.








The Hazing


The Campus of Arcturus University, on Arcturusís second planet, Eron, is a dull place during mid-year vacations and, moreover, a hot one, so that Myron Tubal, sophomore, found life boring and uncomfortable. For the fifth time that day, he looked in at the Undergraduate Lounge in a desperate attempt at locating an acquaintance, and was at last gratified to behold Bill Sefan, a green-skinned youngster from Vegaís fifth planet.
Sefan, like Tubal, had flunked Biosociology and was staying through vacation to study for a make-up exam. Things like that weave strong bonds between sophomore and sophomore.
Tubal grunted a greeting, dropped his huge hairless body-he was a native of the Arcturian System itself-into the largest chair and said:
ìHave you seen the new freshmen yet?î
ìAlready! Itís six weeks before the fall semester starts!î
Tubal yawned. ìThese are a special breed of frosh. Theyíre the very first batch from the Solarian System-ten of them.î
ìSolarian System? You mean that new system that joined the Galactic Federation three-four years ago?î
ìThatís the one. Their world capital is called Earth, I think.î
ìWell, what about them?î
ìNothing much. Theyíre just here, thatís all. Some of them have hair on the upper lip, and very silly it looks, too. Otherwise, they look like any of a dozen or so other breeds of Humanoids.î
Itwas at this point that the door flew open and little Wri Forase ran in. He was from Denebís single planet, and the short, gray fuzz that covered his head and face bristled with agitation, while his large purple eyes gleamed excitedly.
ìSay,î he twittered breathlessly, ìhave you seen the Earthmen?î
Sefan sighed. ìIsnít anyone ever going to change the subject? Tubal was just telling me about them.î
ìHe was?î Forase seemed disappointed. ìBut-but did he tell you these were that abnormal race they made such a fuss over when the Solarian System entered the Federation?î
ìThey looked all right to me,î said Tubal.
ìIím not talking about them from the physical standpoint,î said the Denebian disgustedly. ìItís the mental aspect of the case. Psychology! Thatís the stuff?î Forase was going to be a psychologist some day.
ìOh, that! Well, whatís wrong with them?î
ìTheir mob psychology as a race is all wrong,î babbled Forase. ìInstead of becoming less emotional with numbers, as is the case with every other type of Humanoid known, they become more emotional! In groups, these Earthmen riot, panic, go crazy. The more there are, the worse it is. So help me, we even invented a new mathematical notation to handle the problem. Look!î
He had his pocket-pad and stylus out in one rapid motion; but Tubalís hand clamped down upon them before the stylus so much as made a mark.
Tubal said, ìWhoa! Iíve got a walloping lulu of an idea.î
ìImagine!î murmured Sefan.
Tubal ignored him. He smiled again, and his hand rubbed thoughtfully over his bald dome.
ìListen,î he said, with sudden briskness. His voice dropped to a conspiratorial whisper.
Albert Williams, late of Earth, stirred in his sleep and became conscious of a prodding finger exploring the space between his second and third ribs. He opened his eyes, swiveled his head, stared stupidly; then gasped, shot upright, and reached for the light switch.
ìDonít move,î said the shadowy figure beside his bed. There was a muted click, and the Earthman found himself centered in the pearly beam of a pocket Hash.
He blinked and said, ìWho the blasted devil are you?î
ìYou are going to get out of bed,î replied the apparition stolidly. ìDress, and come with me.î
Williams grinned savagely. ìTry and make me.î
There was no answer, but the Hash beam shifted slightly and fell upon the shadowís other hand. It held a ìneuronic whip,î that pleasant little weapon that paralyzes the vocal cords and twists nerves into so many knots of agony. Williams swallowed hard, and got out of bed.
He dressed in silence, and then said:
ìAll right, what do I do now?î
The gleaming ìwhipî gestured, and the Earthman moved toward the door.
ìJust walk ahead,î said the unknown.
Williams moved out of the room, along the silent corridor, and down eight stories without daring to look back. Out upon the campus he stopped, and felt metal probe the small of his back.
ìDo you know where Obel Hall is?î
Williams, nodding, began walking. He walked past Obel Hall, turned right at University Avenue, and after half a mile stepped off the roads and past the trees. A spaceship hulked dimly in the darkness, with ports closely curtained and only a dim light showing where the airlock opened a crack.
ìGet in!î He was shoved up a flight of stairs and into a small room.
He blinked, looked about him and counted aloud.
ì-seven, eight, nine, and I make ten. Theyíve got us all, I guess.î
ìItís no guess,î growled Eric Chamberlain sourly. ìItís a certainty.î
He was rubbing his hand. ìIíve been here an hour.î
ìWhatís wrong with the mitt?î asked Williams.
ìI sprained it on the jaw of the rat that brought me here. Heís as tough as a spaceshipís hull.î
Williams seated himself cross-legged upon the floor and rested his head against the wall.
ìHas anyone any idea as to what this is all about?î
ìKidnaping!î said little Joey Sweeney. His teeth were chattering.
ìWhat the devil for?î snorted Chamberlain. ìIf any of us are millionaires, I hadnít heard of it. I know Iím not!î
Williams said, ìLook, letís not go off the deep end. Kidnaping or anything of that sort is. out. These people canít be criminals. It stands to reason that a civilization that has developed psychology to the extent this Galactic Federation has, would be able to wipe out crime without raising a sweat.î
ìPirates,î grunted Lawrence Marsh. ìI donít think so, but itís just a suggestion.î
ìNuts!î said Williams. ìPiracy is a frontier phenomenon. This region of space has been civilized for tens of millennia.î
ìJust the same, they had guns,î insisted Joe, ìand I donít like it.î He had left his glasses in his room and peered about in near-sighted anxiety.
ìThat doesnít mean much,î answered Williams. ìNow, Iíve been thinking. Here we are-ten newly arrived freshmen at Arcturus u. On our first night here, weíre bundled mysteriously out of our rooms and into a strange spaceship. That suggests something to me. How about it?î
Sidney Morton raised his head from his arms long enough to say sleepily:
ìIíve thought of it, too. It looks like weíre in for one hell of a hazing. Gents, I think the local sophs are just having good, clean fun.î
ìExactly,î agreed Williams. ìAnyone have any other ideas?î
Silence. ì All right, then, so there isnít anything to do but wait. Personally, Iíve going to catch up on my sleep. They can wake me up if they need me.î
There was a jar at that moment and he fell off balance. ìWell, weíre off-wherever weíre going.î
Moments later, Bill Sefan hesitated just an instant before entering the control room. When he finally did, it was to face a highly excited Wri Forase.
ìHow is it working?î demanded the Denebian.
ìRotten,î responded Sefan sourly. ìIf theyíre panicked, then Iíve damned. Theyíre going to sleep.î
ìAsleep! All of them? But what were they saying?î
ìHow do I know? They werenít speaking Galactic, and I canít make head or tail out of their infernal foreign gibberish.î
Forase threw his hands into the air in disgust.
Tubal spoke finally. ìListen, Forase, Iím cutting a class in Biosoc.-which I canít afford. You guaranteed the psychology of this stunt. If it turns out to be a flop, Iím not going to like it.î
ìWell, for the love of Deneb,î grated Forase desperately, ìyou two are a fine pair of yellow-bellies! Did you expect them to start screaming and kicking right off? Sizzling Arcturus I Wait till we get to the Spican System, will you? When we maroon them overnight-î
He tittered suddenly. ìThis is going to be the fanciest trick since they tied those stink-bats to the chromatic organ on Concert Night.î
Tubal cracked a grin, but Sefan leaned back in his chair and remarked thoughtfully.
ìWhat if someone-say, President Wynn-hears about this?î
The Arcturian at the controls shrugged. ìItís only a hazing. Theyíll ìgo easy.
ìDonít play dumb, M. T. This isnít kid stuff. Planet Four, Spica-the whole Spican System, in fact-is banned to Galactic ships, and you know that. Itís got a sub-Humanoid race on it. Theyíre supposed to develop entirely free of interference until they discover interstellar travel on their own. Thatís the law, and theyíre strict about it. Space! If they find out about this, weíll be in the soup for fair.î
Tubal turned in his seat. ìHow in Arcturus do you expect Prexy Wynn-damn his thick hide!-to find out about us? Now, mind you, Iím not saying the story wonít spread around the campus, because half the fun will be killed if we have to keep it to ourselves. But how will names come out? No one will squeal. You know that.î
ìOkay,î said Sefan, and shrugged.
And then Tubal said, ìReady for hyper-space!î
He compressed keys and there was the queer internal wrench that marked the shipís departure from normal space.
The ten Earthmen were rather the worse for wear, and looked it. Lawrence Marsh squinted at his watch again.
ìTwo-thirty,î he said. ìThatís thirty-six hours now. I wish theyíd get this over with.î
ìThis isnít a hazing,î moaned Sweeney. ìIt takes too long.î
Williams grew red. ìWhat do you all look half-dead about? Theyíve been feeding us regularly, havenít they? They havenít tied us up, have they? I should say it was pretty evident that they were taking good care of us.î
ìOr,î came Sidney Mortonís discontented drawl, ìfattening us up for the slaughter.î
He paused, and everyone stiffened. There was no mistaking the queer internal wrench they had felt.
ìGet that!î said Eric Chamberlain in sudden frenzy. ìWeíre back in normal space again, and that means weíre only an hour or two from wherever weíre going. Weíve got to do something!î
ìHear, hear,î Williams snorted. ìBut what?î
ìThere are ten of us, arenít there?î shouted Chamberlain, puffing out his chest. ìWell, Iíve only seen one of them so far. Next time he comes in, and weíve got another meal due us pretty soon, weíre going to mob him.î
Sweeney looked sick. ìWhat about the neuronic whip he always carries?î
ìIt wonít kill us. He canít get us all before we pin him down, anyway.î
ìEric,î said Williams bluntly, ìyouíre a fool.î
Chamberlain flushed and his stub-fingered fists closed slowly.
ìIím just in the mood for a little practice persuasion. Call me that again, will you?î
ìSit down!î Williams scarcely bothered to look up. ì And donít work so hard justifying my epithet. All of us are nervous and keyed-up, but that doesnít mean we ought to go altogether crazy. Not yet, anyway. First of all, even discounting the whip, mobbing our jailer wonít be particularly successful.
ìWeíve only seen one, but that one is from the Arcturian System. Heís better than seven feet tall, and comfortably past the three-hundred-pound mark. Heíd mop us up-all ten of us-with his bare fists. I thought you had one run-in with him already, Eric.î
There was a thickish silence.
Williams added, ì And even if we could knock him out and finish as many others as there may be in the ship, we still havenít the slightest idea where we are or how to get back or even how to run the ship.î A pause. Then, ìWell?î
ìNuts!î Chamberlain turned away, and glowered in silence.
The door kicked open and the giant Arcturian entered. With one hand, he emptied the bag he carried, and with the other kept his neuronic whip carefully leveled.
ìLast meal,î he grunted.
There was a general scramble for the rolling cans, still lukewarm from recent heating. Morton glared at his with disgust.
ìSay,î he spoke stumblingly in Galactic, ìcanít you give us a change? Iím tired of this rotten goulash of yours. This is the fourth can!î
ìSo what? Itís your last meal,î the Arcturian snapped, and left.
A horrified paralysis prevailed.
ìWhat did he mean by that?î gulped someone huskily.
ìTheyíre going to kill us!î Sweeney was round-eyed, the thin edge of panic in his voice.
Williamsí mouth was dry and he felt unreasoning anger grow against Sweeneyís contagious fright. He paused-the kid was only seventeen-and said huskily, ìStow it, will you? Letís eat.î
It was two hours later that he felt the shuddering jar that meant the landing and end of the journey. In that time, no one had spoken, but Williams could feel the pall of fear choke tighter with the minutes.
Spica had dipped crimsonly below the horizon and there was a chill wind blowing. The ten Earthmen, huddled together miserably upon the rock-strewn hilltop, watched their captors sullenly. It was the huge Arcturian, Myron Tubal, that did the talking, while the green-skinned Vegan, Bill Sefan, and the fuzzy little Denebian, Wri Forase, remained placidly in the background.
ìYouíve got your fire,î said the Arcturian gruffly, ìand thereís plenty of wood about to keep it going. That will keep the beasts away. Weíll leave you a pair of whips before we go, and those will do as protection, if any of the aborigines of the planet bother you. You will have to use your own wits as far as food, water and shelter are concerned.î
He turned away. Chamberlain let loose with a sudden roar, and leaped after the departing Arcturian. He was sent reeling back with an effortless heave of the otherís arm.
The lock closed after the three other-world men. Almost at once, the ship lifted off the ground and shot upward. Williams finally broke the chilled silence.
ìTheyíve left the whips. Iíll take one and you can have the other, Eric.î
One by one, the Earthmen dropped into a sitting position, back to the fire, frightened, half panicky.
Williams forced a grin. ìThereís plenty of game about-the region is well-wooded. Come on, now, there are ten of us and theyíve got to come back sometime. Letís show them we Earthmen can take it. How about it, fellows?î
He was talking aimlessly now. Morton said listlessly.
ìWhy donít you shut up? Youíre not making this any easier.î
Williams gave up. The pit of his own stomach was turning cold.
The twilight blackened into night, and the circle of light about the fire contracted into a little flickering area that ended in shadows. Marsh gasped suddenly, and his eyes went wide.
ìThereís some-something coming!î
The stir that followed froze itself into attitudes of breathless attention.
ìYouíre crazy,î began Williams huskily-and stopped dead at the unmistakable, slithering sound that reached his ears.
ìGrab your whip!î he screamed to Chamberlain.
Joey Sweeney laughed suddenly-a strained, high-pitched laugh.
And then-there was a sudden shrieking in the air, and the shades charged down upon them.
Things were happening elsewhere, too.
Tubalís ship lazed outward from Spicaís fourth planet, with Bin Sefan at the controls. Tubal himself was in his own cramped quarters, polishing off a huge flagon of Denebian liquor in two gulps.
Wri Forase watched the operation sadly.
ìIt cost twenty credits a bottle,î he said, ìand I only have a few left.î
ìWell, donít let me hog it,î said Tubal magnanimously, ìMatch me bottle for bottle. Itís all right with me.î
ìOne swig like that,î grumbled the Denebian, ìand r d be out till the Fall exams:í
Tubal paid scant attention. ìThis,î he began, ìis going to make campus history as the hazing stunt-î
And at this point, there was a sharp, singing pinging ping-g-g-g, scarcely muffled by intervening walls, and the lights went out.
Wri Forase felt himself pressed hard against the wall. He struggled for breath and stuttered out in gasps.
ìB-by Space, weíre at f-full acceleration! Whatís wr-rong with the equalizer?î
ìDamn the equalizer!î roared Tubal, heaving to his feet. ìWhatís wrong with the ship?î
He stumbled out the door, into the equally dark corridor, with Forase crawling after him. When they burst into the control room, they found Sefan surrounded by the dim emergency lights, his green skin shining with perspiration.
ìMeteor,î he croaked. ìIt played hob with our power distributors. Itís all going into acceleration. The lights, heating units and radio are all out of commission, while the ventilators are just barely limping.î He added, ìAnd Section Four is punctured:í
Tubal gazed about him wildly. ìIdiot! Why didnít you keep your eye on the mass indicator?î
ìI did, you overgrown lump of putty,î howled Sefan, ìbut it never registered! It-never-registered! Isnít that just what youíd expect from a second-hand jalopy, rented for two hundred credits? It went through the screen as if it were empty ether.î
ìShut up!î Tubal flung open the suit-compartments and groaned. ìTheyíre all Arcturian models. I should have checked up. Can you handle one of these, Sefan?î
ìMaybe.î The Vegan scratched a doubtful ear.
In five minutes, Tubal swung into the lock and Sefan, stumbling awkwardly, followed after. It was half an hour before they returned.
Tubal removed his head-piece. ìCurtains!î
Wri Forase gasped. ìyou mean-weíre through?î
The Arcturian shook his head. ìWe can fix it, but it will take time. The radio is ruined for good, so we canít get help.î
ìGet help!î Forase looked shocked. ìThatís all we need. How would we explain being inside the Spican system? We might as well commit suicide as send out radio calls. As long as we can get back without help, weíre safe. Missing a few more classes wonít hurt us too much.î
Sefanís voice broke in dully. ìBut what about those panicky Earthmen back on Spica Four?î
Foraseís mouth opened, but he didnít say a word. It closed again, and if ever a Humanoid looked sick, Forase was that Humanoid.
That was only the beginning.
It took a day and a half to unscramble the space jalopyís power lines. It took two more days to decelerate to safe turning point. It took four days to return to Spica IV. Total-eight days.
When the ship hovered once more over the place where they had marooned the Earthmen, it was midmorning, and the Tubalís face as he surveyed the area through the televisor was a study in length. Shortly he broke a silence that had long since become sticky.
ìI guess weíve made every boner we could possibly have made. We landed them right outside a native village. Thereís no sign of the Earthmen.î
Sefan shook his head dolefully. ìThis is a bad business.î
Tubal buried his head in his long arms clear down to the elbows.
ìThatís the finish. If they didnít scare themselves to death, the natives got them. Violating prohibited solar systems is bad enough-but itís just plain murder now, I guess.î
ìWhat weíve got to do,î said Sefan, ìis to get down there and find out if there are any still alive. We owe them that much. After that-î
He swallowed. Forase finished in a whisper.
ìAfter that, itís expulsion from the U., psycho-revision-and manual labor for life.î
ìForget it!î barked Tubal. ìWeíll face that when we have to.î
Slowly, very slowly, the ship circled downward and came to rest on the rocky clearing where, eight days previously, ten Earthmen had been left stranded.
ìHow do we handle these natives?î Tubal turned to Forase with raised eyebrow ridges (there was no hair on them, of course). ìCome on, son, give with some sub-Humanoid psychology. There are only three of us and I donít want any trouble.î
Forase shrugged and his fuzzy face wrinkled in perplexity. ìIíve just been thinking about that, Tubal. I donít know any.î
ìWhat!î exploded Sefan and Tubal in twin shouts.
ìNo one does,î added the Denebian hurriedly. ìItís a fact. After all, we donít let sub-Humanoids into the Federation till theyíre fully civilized, and we quarantine them until then. Do you suppose we have much opportunity to study their psychology?î
The Arcturian seated himself heavily. ìThis gets better and better. Think, Fuzzy-face, will you? Suggest something!î
Forase scratched his head. ìWell-uh-the best we can do is to treat them like normal Humanoids. If we approach slowly, palms spread out, make no sudden movements and keep calm, we ought toget along. Now, remember, Iím saying we ought to. I canít be certain about this.î
ìLetís go, and damnation with certainty,î urged Sefan impatiently. ìIt doesnít matter much, anyway. If I get knocked off here, I donít have to go back home.î His face took on a hunted look. ìWhen I think of what my family is going to say-î
They emerged from the ship and sniffed the atmosphere of Spicaís fourth planet. The sun was at meridian, and loomed overhead like a large orange basketball. Off in the woods, a bird called once in a creaky caw. Utter silence descended.
ìHmph!î said Tubal, arms akimbo.
ìItís enough to make you feel sleepy. No signs of life at all. Now, which way is the villager
There was a three-way dispute about this, but it didnít last long. The Arcturian first, the other two tagging along, they strode down the slope and toward the straggling forest.
A hundred feet inside, the trees came alive, as a wave of natives dropped noiselessly from the overhanging branches. Wri Forase went under at the very first of the avalanche. Bill Sefan stumbled, stood his ground momentarily, then went over backward with a grunt.
Only huge Myron Tubal was left standing. Legs straddled wide, and whooping hoarsely, he laid about right and left. The attacking natives hit him and bounced off like drops of water from a whirling flywheel. Modeling his defense on the principle of the windmill, he backed his way against a tree.
Here he made a mistake. On the lowest branch of that tree squatted a native at once more cautious and more brainy than his fellows. Tubal had already noticed that the natives were equipped with stout, muscular tails, and had made a mental note of the fact. Of all the races in the Galaxy, only one other, Homo Gamma Cepheus, possessed tails. What he didnít notice, however, was that these tails were prehensile.
This he found out almost immediately, for the native in the branch above his head looped his tail downward, Hashed it about Tubalís neck and contracted it.
The Arcturian threshed wildly in agony, and the tailed attacker was jerked from his tree. Suspended head-first and whirled about in huge sweeps, the native nevertheless maintained his hold and tightened that tail-grip steadily.
The world blacked out. Tubal was unconscious before he hit the ground.
Tubal came to slowly, unpleasantly aware of the stinging stiffness of his neck. He tried vainly to rub that stiffness, and it took a few seconds to realize that he was tied tightly. The fact startled him into alertness. He became aware, first, that he was lying on his stomach; second, of the horrible din about him; third, of Sefan and Forase bundled up next to him-and last, that he could not break his bonds.
ìHey, Sefan, Forase! Can you hear me?î
It was Sefan that answered joyfully. ìyou old Draconian goat! We thought you were out for good.î
ìI donít die so easy,î grunted the Arcturian. ìWhere are we?î
There was a short pause.
ìIn the native village, I imagine,î Wri Forase said dully. ìDid you ever hear such a noise? The drum hasnít stopped a minute since they dumped us here.î
ìHave you seen anything of-î
Hands were upon Tubal, and he felt himself whirled about. He was in a sitting posture now and his neck hurt worse than ever. Ramshackle huts of thatch and green logs gleamed in the early afternoon sun. In a circle about them, watching in silence, were dark-skinned, long-tailed natives. There must have been hundreds, all wearing feathered head-dresses and carrying short, wickedly barbed spears.
Their eyes were upon the row of figures that squatted mysteriously in the foreground, and upon these Tubal turned his angry glare. It was plain that they were the leaders of the tribe. Dressed in gaudy, fringed robes of ill-tanned skins, they added further to their barbaric impressiveness by wearing tall wooden masks painted into caricatures of the human face.
With measured steps, the masked horror nearest the Humanoids approached.
ìHello,î it said, and the mask lifted up and off. ìBack so soon?î
For quite a long while, Tubal and Sefan said absolutely nothing, while Wri Forase went into a protracted fit of coughing.
Finally, Tubal drew a long breath. ìYouíre one of the Earthmen, arenít you?î
ìThatís right. Iím Al Williams. Just call me Al.î
ìThey havenít killed you yet?î
Williams smiled happily. ìThey havenít killed any of us. Quite the contrary. Gentlemen,î he bowed extravagantly, ìmeet the new tribal-er-gods.î
ìThe new tribal what?î gasped Forase. He was still coughing. ì-er-gods. Sorry, but I donít know the Galactic word for a god.î
ìWhat do you ëgodsí represent?î
ìWeíre sort of supernatural entities-objects to be worshipped. Donít you get it?î
The Humanoids stared unhappily.
ìYes, indeed,î Williams grinned, ìweíre persons of great power.î
ìWhat are you talking about?î exclaimed Tubal indignantly. ìWhy should they think you were of great power? You Earth people are below average physically-well below!î
ìIts the psychology of the thing,î explained Williams. ìIf they see us landing in a large, gleaming vehicle that travels mysteriously through the air, and then takes off in a burst of rocket-flame-theyíre bound to consider us supernatural. Thatís elementary barbaric psychology.î
Foraseís eyes seemed on the point of dropping out as Williams continued.
ìIncidentally, what detained you? We figure it was all a hazing of some sort, and it was, wasnít it?î
ìSay,î broke in Sefan, ìI think youíre feeding us a lot of bull! If they thought you people were gods, why didnít they think we were? We had the ship, too, and-î
ìThat,î said Williams, ìis where we started to interfere. We explained-via pictures and sign language-that you people were devils. When you finally came back-and say, were we glad to see that ship coming down-they knew what to do.î
ìWhat, ì asked Forase, with a liberal dash of awe in his voice, ìare ëdevilsí?î
Williams sighed. ìDonít you Galaxy people know anything? Tubal moved his aching neck slowly. ìHow about letting us up now?î he rumbled. ìIíve got a crick in my neck.î
ìWhatís your hurry? After all, you were brought here to be sacrificed in our honor.î
ìSacrificed!î
ìSure. Youíre to be carved up with knives.î
There was a horror-laden silence. ìDonít give us any of that cometgas!î Tubal managed to grind out at last. ìWeíre not Earthmen who get panicky or scared, you know.î
ìOh, we know that! I wouldnít fool you for the world. But simple ordinary savage psychology always goes for a little human sacrifice, and-î
Sefan writhed against his bonds and tried to throw himself in a rage at Forase.
ìI thought you said no one knew any sub-Humanoid psychology! Trying to alibi your ignorance, werenít you, you shriveled; fuzz-covered, pop-eyed son of a half-breed Vegan lizard! A fine mess weíre in now!î
Forase shrank away. ìNow, wait! Just-î
Williams decided the joke had gone far enough.
ìTake it easy,î he soothed. ìYour clever hazing blew up right in your faces-it blew up beautifully-but weíre not going to carry it too far. I guess weíve had enough fun out of you fellows. Sweeney is with the native chief now, explaining that weíre leaving and taking you three with us. Frankly, Iíll be glad to get going-Wait a while, Sweeneyís calling me.î
When Williams returned two seconds later, his expression was peculiar, having turned a bit greenish. In fact, he got greener by the second.
ìIt looks,î he gulped throatily, ëëas if our counter-haze has blown up in our faces. The native chief insists on the sacrifice!î
Silence brooded, while the three Humanoids thought over the state of affairs. For moments, none of them could say a word
ìIíve told Sweeney,î Williams added, glumly, ìto go back and tell the chief that if he doesnít do as we say, something terrible is going to happen to his tribe. But itís pure bluff and he may not fall for it. Uh,-Iím sorry, fellows. I guess we went too far. If it looks really bad, weíll cut you loose and join in the fight.î
ìCut us loose now,î growled Tubal, his blood running cold. ìLetís get this over with!î
ìWait!î cried Forase frantically. ìLet the Earthman try some of his psychology. Go ahead, Earthman. Think hard!î
Williams thought until his brain began to hurt.
ìYou see,î he said weakly, ìweíve lost some of our godlike prestige, ever since we were unable to cure the chiefís wife. She died yesterday.î He nodded abstractedly to himself. ìWhat we need is an impressive miracle. Er-have you fellows anything in your pockets?î
He knelt beside them and began searching. Wri Forase had a stylus, a pocket-pad, a thin-toothed comb, some anti-itch powder, a sheaf of credits and a few odds and ends. Sefan had a collection of similar nondescript material.
It was from Tubalís hip pocket that Williams withdrew a small black gunlike object with a huge hand-grip and a short barrel.
ìWhatís this?î
Tubal scowled. ìIs that what Iíve been sitting on all this while? Itís a weld-gun that I used to fix up a meteor puncture in our ship. Itís no good; powerís almost gone.î
Williamsí eyes kindled. His whole body galvanized with excitement.
ìThatís what you think! You Galaxy men never could see farther than your noses. Why donít you come down to Earth for a spell-and get a new point of view?î
Williams was running toward his fellow conspirators now.
ìSweeney,î he howled, ìyou tell that damned monkey-tailed chief that in just about one second, Iím going to get sore and pull the whole sky down over his head. Get tough!î
But the chief did not wait for the message. He gestured defiance and the natives made a united rush. Tubal roared, and his muscles cracked against the bonds. The weld-gun in Williamsí hand flared into life, its feeble power beaming outward.
The nearest native hut went up in sudden flames. Another followed-and another-and the fourth-and then the weld-gun went dead.
But it was enough. Not a native remained standing. All were groveling on their faces, wailing and shrieking for pardon. The chief wailed and shrieked loudest of all.
ìTell the chief,î said Williams to Sweeney, ìthat thatís just a little, insignificant sample of what weíre thinking of doing to him!î
To the Humanoids, as he cut the rawhide holding them, he added complacently,
ìJust some simple, ordinary savage psychology.î
It was only after they were back in their ship and off in space again that Forase locked up his pride.
ìBut I thought Earthmen had never developed mathematical psychology! How did You know all that sub-Humanoid stuff? No one in the Galaxy has got that far yet!î
ìWell,î Williams grinned, ìwe have a certain amount of rule-of-thumb knowledge about the workings of the uncivilized mind. You see-we come from a world where most people, in a manner of speaking, are still uncivilized. So we have to know!î
Forase nodded slowly. ìYou screwball Earthmen! At least, this little episode has taught us all one thing.î
ìWhatís that?î
ìNever,î said Forase, dipping a second time into Earth slang, ìget tough with a bunch of nuts. They may be nuttier than you think!î



***



In going through my stories while preparing this book, I found ìThe Hazingî to be the only published story concerning which I could remember nothing from the title alone. Even as I reread it, nothing clicked. If I had been given the story without my name on it and had been asked to read it and guess the author, I would probably have been stumped. Maybe that means something.
It does seem to me, though, that the story is set against a ìHomo Solî background.
I had better luck with Fred Pohl with another story, ìSuper-Neutron,î which I wrote at the end of the same February in which I did ìMasksî and ìThe Hazing.î I submitted it to him on March 3, 1941, and he accepted it on March 5.
By that time, less than three years after my first submission, I was clearly becoming rather impatient with rejections. At least, the news of the acceptance of ìSuper-Neutronî is greeted in my diary with an ìItís about time I made a sale-five and a half weeks since the last one.î








Super-Neutron


It was at the seventeenth meeting of the Honorable Society of Ananias that we got the greatest scare of our collective lives and consequently elected Gilbert Hayes to the office of Perpetual President.
The Society is not a large one. Before the election of Hayes there were only four of us: John Sebastian, Simon Murfree, Morris Levin and myself. On the first Sunday of every month we met at luncheon, and on these monthly occasions justified our Societyís title by gambling the dinner check on our ability to lie.
It was quite a complicated process, with strict Parliamentary rules. One member spun a yarn each meeting as his turn came up, and two conditions had to be adhered to. His story had to be an outrageous, complicated, fantastic lie; and, it had to sound like the truth. Members were allowed to-and did-attack any and every point of the story by asking questions or demanding explanations.
Woe to the narrator who did not answer all questions immediately, or who, in answering, involved himself in a contradiction. The dinner-check was his! Financial loss was slight; but the disgrace was great.
And then came that seventeenth meeting-and Gilbert Hayes. Hayes was one of several non-members who attended occasionally to listen to the after-dinner whopper, paying his own check, and, of course, being forbidden to participate; but on this occasion he was the only one present aside from the regular members.
Dinner was over, I had been voted into the chair (it was my regular turn to preside), and the minutes had been read, when Hayes leaned forward and said quietly, ìIíd like a chance today, gentlemen.î
I frowned, ìIn the eyes of the Society you are non-existent, Mr. Hayes. It is impossible for you to take part.î
ìThen just let me make a statement, ì he rejoined. ìThe Solar System is coming to an end at exactly seventeen and a half minutes after two this afternoon.î
There was a devil of a stir, and I looked at the electric clock over the television receiver. It was 1:14 P.M.
I said hesitantly, ìIf you have anything to substantiate that extraordinary statement, it should be most interesting. It is Mr. Levinís turn today, but if he is willing to waive it, and if the rest of the Society agrees-î
Levin smiled and nodded, and the others joined in.
I banged the gavel, ìMr. Hayes has the floor.î
Hayes lit his cigar and gazed at it pensively. ìI have little more than an hour, gentlemen, but Iíll start at the beginning-which is about fifteen years ago. At that time, though Iíve resigned since, I was an astrophysicist at Yerkes Observatory-young, but promising. I was hot on the trail of the solution to one of the perennial puzzles of astrophysics-the source of the cosmic rays-and full of ambition.î
He paused, and continued in a different tone, ìYou know, it is strange that with all our scientific advance in the last two centuries we have never found either that mysterious source or the equally mysterious reason for the explosion of a star. They are the two eternal puzzles and we know as little about them today as we did in the days of Einstein, Eddington, and Millikan.
ìStill, as I say, I thought I had the cosmic ray by the tail, so I set out to check my ideas by observation, and for that I had to go out in space. It wasnít, however, as easy as all that. It was in 2129, you see, just after the last war, and the Observatory was about broke-as werenít we all?
ìI made the best of it. I hired an old second-hand ë07 model, piled my apparatus in, and set out alone. Whatís more, I had to sneak out of port without clearance papers, not wishing to go through the red tape the occupation army would have put me through. It was illegal, but I wanted my data-so I headed out at a right angle to the ecliptic, in the direction of the South Celestial Pole, approximately, and left Sol a billion miles behind me.
ìThe voyage I made, and the data I collected are unimportant. I never reported one or the other. It was the planet I found that makes the story.î
At this point, Murfree raised those bushy eyebrows of his and grunted, ìI would like to warn the gentleman, Mr. Chairman. No member has yet escaped with his skin with a phony planet.î
Hayes smiled grimly, ìIíll take my chance. -To continue; it was on the eighteenth day of my trip that I first detected the planet, as a little orange disc the size of a pea. Naturally, a planet in that region of space is something of a sensation. I headed for it; and immediately discovered that I had not even scratched the surface of that planetís queerness. To exist there at all was phenomenal-but it likewise possessed absolutely no gravitational field.î
Levinís wine-glass crashed to the floor. ìMr. Chairman,î he gasped, ìI demand the gentlemanís immediate disqualification. No mass can exist without distorting the space in its neighborhood and thus creating a gravitational field He has made an impossible statement, and should therefore be disqualified.î His face was an angry red.
But Hayes held his hand up, ìI demand time, Mr. Chairman. The explanation will be forthcoming in due course. To make it now would only complicate things. Please, may I continue?î
I considered, ìIn view of the nature of your story, I am disposed to be lenient. Delay is granted, but please remember that an explanation will be required eventually. You will lose without it.î
ìAll right, ì said Hayes. ìFor the present, you will have to accept my statement that the planet had no gravity at all. That is definite, for I had complete astronomical equipment upon my ship, and though my instruments were very sensitive, they registered a dead zero.
ìIt worked the other way around as well, for the planet was not affected by the gravity of other masses. Again, I stress the point that it was not affected at all. This I was not able to determine at the time, but subsequent observation over a period of years, showed that the planet was traveling in a straight-line orbit and at a constant speed. As it was well within the sunís influence, the fact that its orbit was neither elliptical nor hyperbolic, and that, though approaching the sun, it was not accelerating, showed definitely that it was independent of solar gravity.î
ìWait a while, Hayes.î Sebastian scowled till his gold premolar gleamed. ìWhat held this wonderful planet together? Without gravity, why didnít it break up and drift apart?î
ìSheer inertia, for one thing!î was the immediate retort. ìThere was nothing to pull it apart. A collision with another body of comparable size might have done it-leaving out of consideration the possibility of the existence of some other binding force peculiar to the planet ì
He sighed and continued, ìThat doesnít finish the properties of the body. Its red-orange color and its low reflective power, or albedo, set me on another track, and I made the astonishing discovery that the planet was entirely transparent to the whole electro-magnetic spectrum from radio waves to cosmic rays. It was only in the region of the red and yellow portion of the visible-light octave that it was reasonably opaque. Hence, its color.î
ìWhy was this?î demanded Murfree.
Hayes looked at me, ìThat is an unreasonable question, Mr. chairman. I maintain that I might as well be asked to explain why glass is entirely transparent to anything above or below the ultra-violet region, so that heat, light, and X-rays pass through, while it remains opaque to ultra-violet light itself. This sort of thing is a property of the substance itself and must be accepted as such without explanation.î
I whacked my gavel, ìQuestion declared improper!î
ìI object,î declared Murfree. ìHayes missed the point Nothing is perfectly transparent Glass of sufficient thickness will stop even cosmic rays. Do you mean to say that blue light would pass through an entire planet, or heat, for instance?î
ìWhy not?î replied Hayes. ìThat perfect transparency does not exist in your experience does not mean it does not exist altogether. There is certainly no scientific law to that effect This planet was perfectly transparent except for one small region of the spectrum. Thatís a definite fact of observation.î
My gavel thumped again, ìExplanation declared sufficient Continue, Hayes.î
His cigar had gone out and he paused to relight Then, ìIn other respects, the planet was normal. It was not quite the size of Saturn-perhaps half way in diameter between it and Neptune. Subsequent experiments showed it to possess mass, though it was hard to find out how much-certainly more than twice Earthís. With mass, it possessed the usual properties of inertia and momentum-but no gravity.î
It was 1:35 now.
Hayes followed my eyes and said, ìYes, only three-quarters of an hour is left. Iíll hurry!ÖNaturally, this queer planet set me to thinking, and that, together with the fact that I had already been evolving certain theories concerning cosmic rays and novae, led to an interesting solution.î
He drew a deep breath, ìImagine-if you can-our cosmos as a cloud of-well, super-atoms which-î
ìI beg your pardon,î exclaimed Sebastian, rising to his feet, ìare you intending to base any of your explanation on drawing analogies between stars and atoms, or between solar systems and electronic orbits?î
ìWhy do you ask?î questioned Hayes, quietly. ìBecause if you do, I demand immediate disqualification. The belief that atoms are miniature solar systems is in a class with the Ptolemaic scheme of the universe. The idea has never been accepted by responsible scientists even at the very dawn of the atomic theory.î
I nodded, ìThe gentleman is correct. No such analogy will be permitted as part of the explanation.î
ì I object,î said Hayes. ìIn your school course in elementary physics or chemistry, you will remember that in the study of the properties of gases, it was often pretended, for the sake of illustrating a point, that the gas molecules were tiny billiard balls. Does that mean that gas molecules are billiard balls?î
ìNo,î admitted Sebastian.
ìIt only means,î drove on Hayes, ìthat gas molecules act similarly to billiard balls in some ways. Therefore the actions of one are better visualized by studying the actions of the other. -Well, then, I am only trying to point out a phenomenon in our universe of stars, and for the sake of ease of visualization, I compare it to a similar, and better-known, phenomenon in the world of atoms. That does not mean that stars are magnified atoms.î
I was won over. ìThe point is well-taken,î I said. ìYou may continue with your explanation, but if it is the judgment of the chair that the analogy becomes a false one, you will be disqualified.î
ìGood,î agreed Hayes, ìbut weíll pass on to another point for a moment. Do any of you remember the first atomic power plants of a hundred and seventy years ago and how they operated?î
ìI believe,î muttered Levin, ìthat they used the classical uranium fission method for power. They bombarded uranium with slow neutrons and split it up into masurium, barium, gamma rays and more neutrons, thus establishing a cyclic process.î
ìThatís right! Well, imagine that the stellar universe acted in ways-mind you, this is a metaphor, and not to be taken literally-like a body composed of uranium atoms, and imagine this stellar universe to be bombarded from without by objects which might act in some ways similar to the way neutrons act on an atomic scale.
ìSuch a super-neutron, hitting a sun, would cause that sun to explode into radiation and more super-neutrons. In other words, you would have a nova.î He looked around for disagreement.
ìWhat justification have you for that idea?î demanded Levin.
ìTwo; one logical, and one observational. Logic first. Stars are essentially in matter-energy equilibrium, yet suddenly, with no observable change, either spectral or otherwise, they occasionally explode. An explosion indicates instability, but where? Not within the star, for it had been in equilibrium for millions of years. Not from a point within the universe, for novae occur in even concentration throughout the universe. Hence, by elimination, only from a point outside the universe.
ìSecondly, observation. I came across one of these super-neutrons!î
Said Murfree indignantly: ìI suppose you mean that gravitationless planet you came across?î
ìThatís right.î
ìThen what makes you think itís a super-neutron? You canít use your theory as proof, because youíre using the super-neutron itself to bolster the theory. Weíre not allowed to argue in circles here.î
ìI know that,î declared Hayes, stiffly. ìIíll resort to logic again. The world of atoms possesses a cohesive force in the electro-magnetic charge on electrons and protons. The world of stars possesses a cohesive force in gravity. The two forces are only alike in a very general manner. For instance, there are two kinds of electrical charges, positive and negative, but only one kind of gravity-and innumerable minor differences. Still, an analogy this far seems to me to be permissible. A neutron on an atomic scale is a mass without the atomic cohesive force-electric charge. A super-neutron on a stellar scale ought to be a mass without the stellar cohesive force-gravity. Therefore, if I find a body without gravity, it seems reasonable to assume it to be a super-neutron.î
ìDo you consider that a rigorously scientific proof?î asked Sebastian sarcastically.
ìNo,î admitted Hayes, ìbut it is logical, conflicts with no scientific fact I know of, and works out to form a consistent explanation of novae. That should be enough for our purpose at present.î
Murfree was gazing hard at his fingernails, ìAnd just where is this superneutron of yours heading?î
ìI see you anticipate,î said Hayes, sombrely. ìIt was what I asked myself at the time. At 2:09Y2 today it hits the sun square, and eight minutes later, the radiation resulting from the explosion will sweep Earth to oblivion.î
ìWhy didnít you report all this?î barked Sebastian.
ìWhere was the use? There was nothing to be done about it. We canít handle astronomical masses. All the power available on Earth would not have sufficed to swerve that great body from its path. There was no escape within the Solar System itself, for Neptune and Pluto will turn gaseous along with the other planets, and interstellar travel is as yet impossible. Since man cannot exist independently in space, he is doomed.
ìWhy tell of all this? What would result after I had convinced them that the death warrant was signed? Suicides, crime waves, orgies, messiahs, evangelists, and everything bad and futile you could think of. And after all, is death by nova so bad? It is instantaneous and clean. At 2:17 youíre here. At 2:18 you are a mass of attenuated gas. It is so quick and easy a death, it is almost not death.î
There was a long silence after this. I felt uneasy. There are lies and lies, but this sounded like the real thing. Hayes didnít have that little quirk of the lip or that little gleam in the eye which marks the triumph of putting over a good one. He was deadly, deadly serious. I could see the others felt the same. Levin was gulping at his wine, hand shaking.
Finally, Sebastian coughed loudly, ìHow long ago did you discover this super-neutron and where?î
ìFifteen years ago, a billion miles or better from the sun.î
ìAnd all that time it has been approaching the sun?î
ìYes; at a constant speed of two miles per second.î
ìGood, Iíve got you!î Sebastian almost laughed his relief. ìWhy havenít the astronomers spotted it in all this while?î
ìMy God,î responded Hayes, impatiently, ìitís clear you arenít an astronomer. Now, what fool would look to the Southern Celestial Pole for a planet, when theyíre only found in the ecliptic?î
ìBut,ì pointed out Sebastian, ìthe region is studied just the same. It is photographed.î
ìSurely! For all I know, the super-neutron has been photographed a hundred times-a thousand times if you like-though the Southern Pole is the most poorly watched region of the sky. But whatís to differentiate it from a star? With its low albedo, it never passed eleventh magnitude in brightness. After all, itís hard enough to detect any planets in any case. Uranus was spotted many times before Herschel realized it was a planet. Pluto took years to find even when they were looking for it. Remember also that without gravity, it causes no planetary perturbations, and that the absence of these removes the most obvious indication of its presence.î
ìBut, ì insisted Sebastian, desperately, ìas it approached the sun, its apparent size would increase and it would begin to show a perceptible disc through a telescope. Even if its reflected light were very faint, it would certainly obscure the stars behind it.î
ìTrue,î admitted Hayes. ìI will not say that a really thorough mapping of the Polar Region would not have uncovered it, but such mapping has been done long ago, and the present cursory searches for novae, special spectral types, and so on are by no means thorough. Then, as the super-neutron approaches the sun, it begins to appear only in the dawn and twilight-in evening and morning star fashion-so that observation becomes much more difficult. And so, as a matter of fact, it just has not been observed-and it is what should have been expected.î
Again a silence, and I became aware that my heart was pounding. Itwas two oíclock even, and we hadnít been able to shake Hayesí story. We had to prove it a lie fast, or r d die of sheer suspense. We were all of us watching the clock.
Levin took up the fight. ìItís an awfully queer coincidence that the super-neutron should be heading straight for the sun. What are the chances against it? Remember, that would be the same thing as reciting the chances against the truth of the story.î
I interposed, ìThat is an illegitimate objection, Mr. Levin. To cite improbability, however great, is not sufficient. Only outright impossibility or citation of inconsistency can serve to disqualify.î
But Hayes waved his hand, ìItís all right. Let me answer. Taking an individual super-neutron and an individual star, the chances of collision, head on, are all but infinitely small. However, statistically, if you shoot enough super-neutrons into the universe, then, given enough time, every star ought to be hit sooner or later. Space must be swarming with super-neutrons-say one every thousand cubic parsecs-so that in spite of the vast distances between the stars and the relative minuteness of the targets, twenty novae occur in our single Galaxy every year-that is, there are twenty collisions between superneutrons and stars annually.
ìThe situation is no different really from uranium being bombarded with ordinary neutrons. Only one neutron out of a hundred million may score a hit, but, given time, every nucleus is exploded eventually. If there is an outer-universe intelligence directing this bombardment-pure hypothesis, and not part of my argument, please-a year to us is probably an infinitesimal fraction of a second to them. The hits, to them, may be occurring at the rate of billions to their seconds. Energy is being developed, perhaps, to the point where the material this universe composes has become heated to the gaseous state-or whatever passes for the gaseous state there. The universe is expanding, you know-like a gas.î
ìStill, for the very first super-neutron entering our system to head straight for the sun seems-î Levin ended in a weak stammer.
ìGood Lord,î snapped Hayes, ìwho told you this was the first? Hundreds may have passed through the system in geologic times. One or two may have passed through in the last thousand years or so. How would we know? Even when one is headed straight for the sun, astronomers donít find it. Perhaps this is the only one thatís passed through since the telescope was invented, and before then, of course. And never forget that, having no gravity, they can go right through the middle of the system, without affecting the planets. Only a hit on the sun registers, and then itís too late.î
He looked at the clock, ì2:o51 We ought to see it now against the sun.î He stood up and raised the window shade. The yellow sunlight streamed in and I moved away from the dusty shaft of light. My mouth was dry as desert sand. Murfree was mopping his brow, but beads of sweat stood out all along his cheeks and neck.
Hayes took out several slips of exposed film-negative and handed them out, ìI came prepared, you see.î He held one up and squinted at the sun. ìThere it is,î he remarked placidly. ìMy calculations showed it would be in transit with respect to Earth at the time of collision. Rather convenient!î
I was looking at the sun, too, and felt my heart skip a beat. There, quite clear against the brightness of the sun, was a little, perfectly round, black spot.
ìWhy doesnít it vaporize?î stammered Murfree. ìIt must be almost in the sunís atmosphere.î I donít think he was trying to disprove Hayesí story. He had gone past that. He was honestly seeking information.
ìI told you,î explained Hayes, ìthat it is transparent to almost all solar radiation. Only the radiation it absorbs can go into heat and thatís a very small percentage of all it receives. Besides, it isnít ordinary matter. Itís probably much more refractory than anything on Earth, and the Solar surface is only at 6,000 degrees Centrigrade.î
He pointed a thumb over his shoulder, ìItís 2:09?, gentlemen. The super-neutron has struck and death is on its way. We have eight minutes.î
We were dumb with something that was just simply unbearable terror. I remember Hayesí voice, quite matter-of-fact, saying, ìMercury just went?î then a few minutes later, ìVenus has gone!î and lastly, ìThirty seconds left, gentlemen!î
The seconds crawled, but passed at last, and another thirty seconds, and still anotherÖ
And on Hayesí face, a look of astonishment grew and spread. He lifted the clock and stared at it, then peered through his film at the sun once more.
ìItís gone?î He turned and faced us, ìItís unbelievable. I had thought of it, but I dared not draw the atomic analogy too far. You know that not all atomic nuclei explode on being hit by a neutron. Some, cadmium, for instance, absorb them one after the other like sponges do water. I-î
He paused again, drew a deep breath, and continued musingly, ìEven the purest block of uranium contains traces of all other elements. And in a universe of trillions of stars acting like uranium, what does a paltry million of cadmium-like stars amount to-nothing! Yet the sun is one of them! Mankind never deserved that!î
He kept on talking, but relief had finally penetrated and we listened no longer. In half-hysterical fashion, we elected Gilbert Hayes to the office of Perpetual President by enthusiastic acclamation, and voted the story the whoppingest lie ever told.
But thereís one thing that bothers me. Hayes fills his post well; the Society is more successful than ever-but I think he should have been disqualified after all. His story fulfilled the second condition; it sounded like the truth. But I donít think it fulfilled the first condition.
I think it was the truth!



***



I had series on my mind by now. ìSuper-Neutronî was certainly intended to be but the first in a long chain of very clever and very ingenious tales to be told at the meetings of the ìHonorable Society of Ananias.î It didnít work out that way. There was never a second story, not even the beginnings of one, not even the idea for one.
By the time I was writing ìSuper-Neutron,î in February of 1941, I had heard of uranium fission and had even discussed it in some detail with Campbell. I managed to refer to it in the course of the story as ìthe classical uranium fission method for power.î I also spoke of the metal cadmium as a neutron absorber. It wasnít bad for a story that appeared in 1941, and I sometimes quote it in public to create an impression.
Notice, though, that in the same paragraph in which I mention fission, I also talk of ìmasurium.î Actually, masurium was the name given to element ~43 in 1926, but that discovery had proven a false alarm. The element was really discovered in 1937 and was given the now-accepted name of ìtechnetium.î It seems, then, that I could look years into the future and see uranium fission as a practical power source, but I couldnít look a few years into the past and see the correct name for element #43.
This brings us to March 17, 1941, and one of the key turning points of my literary career.
By that day, I had written thirty-one stories. Of these I had already sold seventeen and was yet to sell four more. Of all these stories, three perhaps, and no more, were to turn out to be of more than ephemeral value, and those were the three ìpositronic robotsî stories I had so far written: ìRobbie,î
ìReason,î and ìLiar!î
Looking back on my first three years as a writer, then, I can judge myself to be nothing more than a steady and (perhaps) hopeful third-rater. Whatís more, thatís all I considered myself then, too. Nor did anyone else, at that time, seriously consider me as a potential first-magnitude star in the science fiction heavens-except, maybe, Campbell.
What are the odds, then, that on March 17, 1941, I would sit down and write something that for thirty years now has been considered by a surprising number of people to be the outstanding short classic of magazine science fiction? It was one of those things that couldnít possibly happen-yet it did.
It began when I walked into Campbellís office that day and, as usual, suggested an idea. What it was I donít remember, but whatever it was he turned it down instantly, not because it was such a bad idea but because he had something he wanted to show me that crowded everything else out of his mind. He had come across a quotation from Ralph Waldo Emerson that went: ìIf the stars should appear one night in a thousand years, how would men believe and adore, and preserve for many generations the remembrance of the city of God!î [Does anyone know in what essay, and in what connection, Emerson says this? Every once in a while I make a desultory search through quotation books or through a collection of Emerson but havenít found it yet. I hope it exists and that the quote is given correctly.]
Campbell asked me what I thought would happen if the stars would appear at only very long intervals. I had nothing intelligent to suggest.
ìI think men would go mad,î he said thoughtfully.
We talked about that notion for quite a while, and I went home to write a story on the subject, one that Campbell and I decided from the start was to be called ìNightfallî
I began it that night. I can remember the details exactly: my parentsí apartment on Windsor Place in Brooklyn, across the street from the candy store; my own room, just next to the living room, is clear in my mind, with the position of my bed, my desk, my typewriter-and myself getting started.
In years to come, fans would occasionally vote in polls designed to decide the best science fiction short stories of all time. Quite frequently, ìNightfallî would finish in first place. Just a couple of years ago, the Science Fiction Writers of America polled their membership to decide the best science fiction short stories ever published, for inclusion in a Hall of Fame anthology. ìNightfallî finished in first place by a sizable margin. And, of course, it has been anthologized a dozen times so far.
With all this, one might argue that ìNightfallî is the best (or at least the most popular) short science fiction story ever to appear in the magazines. Well, I often wonder, with a shudder, what might have happened on the evening of March 17, 1941, if some angelic spirit had whispered in my ear, ìIsaac, you are about to start writing the best short science fiction story of our time.î
I would undoubtedly have frozen solid. I wouldnít have been able to type a word.
But we donít know the future, and I tapped away blissfully, writing the story and completing it by April 9, 1941. That day, I submitted it to Campbell. He asked for a small revision. I took care of that, and on April 24, 1941, he bought the story.
It set several records for me. It was the longest story I had yet sold, a little over thirteen thousand words. Since Campbell paid me a bonus (my first one), the word rate was one and a quarter cents a word, and the total check was for $166, more than twice as large as any single payment I had ever before received. [ìBlack Friar of the Flameî was three thousand words longer than ìNightfall,î but the former was not to be sold for another half year, and since it earned merely one cent a word, it brought in only $161. Of course, first-time earnings are not the whole story, either. ìNightfallî has earned me some thousands of dollars since 1941 and will yet earn me more; ìBlack Friar of the Flameî has not yet earned me one cent over the original check-till its appearance in this book.]
Then, too, ìNightfallî appeared in the September 1941 issue of Astounding as the lead novelette. For the first time, I made the cover of that magazine, with ìNightfall, by Isaac Asimovî in large, bold letters.
Most important of all, the appearance of ìNightfallî graduated me by common consent (three years after I had begun my career) into the list of first-rank science fiction writers.
Alas, the story is not included here. It appears (of course) in Nightfall and Other Stories. [In telling the story, in that collection, of how ìNightfallî came to be written, I mentioned that I had received $150 for it, quoting from memory. Once again, I must confess fallibility. The records say $166. It is a small point, and perhaps not worth noting, but I know my readers. By explaining this now, I fend off dozens of letters that will mention the discrepancy and demand an explanation.]
The excitement of writing ìNightfallî and Campbellís hearty and unqualified praise of it ought, one might think, to have set me furiously to work at the typewriter, but it didnít. Spring 1941 was a bad time for me.
I could at any time that half year have left Columbia with a masterís degree, but that would have done me no good. I had no job to go to, so I could only mark time and try to raise my value to some prospective employer by going on to the big one, the doctorate.
But that meant I had to take a series of elaborate, interminable ìqualifying examinations,î which I had to pass in order to be allowed to begin the research without which I could not get the Ph.D. Passing was difficult and I didnít feel prepared at all, but I had to try it sometime, and besides, if I didnít fall short by too far, I would be allowed to continue taking courses and to repeat the qualifying examinations at some future date.
So in May I absented myself from the typewriter, studied earnestly for my qualifyings, took them-and didnít pass. I did well enough to earn the option of a future repeat, and I also received my M.A. as a kind of consolation prize, but I was badly disheartened all the same.
(And in the larger world outside, though Great Britain had survived air bombardment, Hitler still seemed unstoppable. He invaded the Balkans and was again winning spectacular victories, and that was disheartening, too.)
It was not till May 24. 1941, that I could bring myself to go back to my writing. I turned out ìNot Final!î which I submitted to Campbell on June z. It was accepted on the sixth, but without a bonus.








Not Final!


Nicholas Orloff inserted a monocle in his left eye with all the incorruptible Briticism of a Russian educated at Oxford and said reproachfully, ìBut, my dear Mr. Secretary! Half a billion dollars!î
Leo Birnam shrugged his shoulders wearily and allowed his lank body to cramp up still farther in the chair, ìThe appropriation must go through, commissioner. The Dominion government here at Ganymede is becoming desperate. So far, Iíve been holding them off, but as secretary of scientific affairs, my powers are small.î
ìI know, but-î and Orloff spread his hands helplessly. ìI suppose so,î agreed Birnam. ìThe Empire government finds it easier to look the other way. Theyíve done it consistently up to now. Iíve tried for a year now to have them understand the nature of the danger that hangs over the entire System, but it seems that it canít be done. But Iím appealing to you, Mr. Commissioner. Youíre new in your post and can approach this Jovian affair with an unjaundiced eye.î
Orloff coughed and eyed the tips of his boots. In the three months since he had succeeded Gridley as colonial commissioner he had tabled unread everything relating to ìthose damned Jovian D.T.ís.î That had been according to the established cabinet policy which had labeled the Jovian affair as ìdeadwoodî long before he had entered office.
But now that Ganymede was becoming nasty, he found himself sent out to Jovopolis with instructions to hold the ìblasted provincialsî down. It was a nasty spot.
Birnam was speaking, ìThe Dominion government has reached the point where it needs the money so badly, in fact, that if they donít get it, theyíre going to publicize everything.î
Orloffís phlegm broke completely, and he snatched at the monocle as it dropped, ìMy dear fellow!î
ìI know what it would mean. Iíve advised against it, but theyíre justified. Once the inside of the Jovian affair is out; once the people know about it; the Empire government wonít stay in power a week. And when the Technocrats come in, theyíll give us whatever we ask. Public opinion will see to that.î
ìBut youíll also create a panic and hysteria-î
ìSurely! That is why we hesitate. But you might call this an ultimatum. We want secrecy, we need secrecy; but we need money more.î
ìI see.î Orloff was thinking rapidly, and the conclusions he came to were not pleasant. ìIn that case, it would be advisable to investigate the case further. If you have the papers concerning the communications with the planet Jupiter-î
ìI have them,î replied Birnam, dryly, ìand so has the Empire government at Washington. That wonít do, commissioner. Itís the same cud thatís been chewed by Earth officials for the last year, and itís gotten us nowhere. I want you to come to Ether Station with me.î
The Ganymedan had risen from his chair, and he glowered down upon Orloff from his six and a half feet of height.
Orloff flushed, ì Are you ordering me?î
ìIn a way, yes. I tell you there is no time. If you intend acting, you must act quickly or not at all.î Birnam paused, then added, ìYou donít mind walking, I hope. Power vehicles arenít allowed to approach Ether Station, ordinarily, and I can use the walk to explain a few of the facts. Itís only two miles off.î
ìIíll walk,î was the brusque reply.
The trip upward to subground level was made in silence, which was broken by Orloff when they stepped into the dimly lit anteroom.
ìItís chilly here.î
ìI know. Itís difficult to keep the temperature up to norm this near the surface. But it will be colder outside. Here!î
Birnam had kicked open a closet door and was indicating the garments suspended from the ceiling. ìPut them on. Youíll need them.î
Orloff fingered them doubtfully, ìAre they heavy enough?î
Birnam was pouring into his own costume as he spoke. ìTheyíre electrically heated. Youíll find them plenty warm. Thatís it! Tuck the trouser legs inside the boots and lace them tight.î
He turned then and, with a grunt, brought out a double compressed-gas cylinder from its rack in one corner of the closet. He glanced at the dial reading; and then turned the stopcock. There was a thin wheeze of escaping gas, at which Birnam sniffed with satisfaction.
ìDo you know how to work one of these?î he asked, as he screwed onto the jet a flexible tube of metal mesh, at the other end of which was a curiously curved object of thick, clear glass.
ìWhat is it?î
ìOxygen nosepiece! What there is of Ganymedeís atmosphere is argon and nitrogen, just about half and half. It isnít particularly breathable.î He heaved the double cylinder into position, and tightened it in its harness on Orloffís back.
Orloff staggered, ìItís heavy. I canít walk two miles with this.î
ìIt wonít be heavy out there,î Birnam nodded carelessly upward and lowered the glass nosepiece over Orloffís head. ìJust remember to breathe in through the nose and out through the mouth, and you wonít have any trouble. By the way, did you eat recently?î
ìI lunched before I came to your place.î
Birnam sniffed dubiously, ìWell, thatís a little awkward.î He drew a small metal container from one of his pockets and tossed it to the commissioner. ìput one of those pills in your mouth and keep sucking on it.î
Orloff worked clumsily with gloved fingers and finally managed to get a brown spheriod out of the tin and into his mouth. He followed Birnam up a gently sloped ramp. The blind-alley ending of the corridor slid aside smoothly when they reached it and there was a faint soughing as air slipped out into the thinner atmosphere of Ganymede.
Birnam caught the otherís elbow, and fairly dragged him out.
ìIíve turned your air tank on full,î he shouted. ìBreathe deeply and keep sucking at that pill.î
Gravity had flicked to Ganymedan normality as they crossed the threshold and Orloff after one horrible moment of apparent levitation, felt his stomach turn a somersault and explode.
He gagged, and fumbled the pill with his tongue in a desperate attempt at self-control. The oxygen-rich mixture from the air cylinders burned his throat, and gradually Ganymede steadied. His stomach shuddered back into place. He tried walking.
ìTake it easy, now,î came Birnamís soothing voice. ìIt gets you that way the first few times you change gravity fields quickly. Walk slowly and get the rhythm, or youíll take a tumble. Thatís right, youíre getting it ì
The ground seemed resilient Orloff could feel the pressure of the otherís arm holding him down at each step to keep him from springing too high. Steps were longer now-and flatter, as he got the rhythm. Birnam continued speaking, a voice a little muffled from behind the leather flap drawn loosely across mouth and chin.
ìEach to his own world,î he grinned. ìI visited Earth a few years back, with my wife, and had a hell of a time. I couldnít get myself to learn to walk on a planetís surface without a nosepiece. I kept choking-I really did. The sunlight was too bright and the sky was too blue and the grass was too green. And the buildings were right out on the surface. Iíll never forget the time they tried to get me to sleep in a room twenty stories up in the air, with the window wide open and the moon shining in.
ìI went back on the first spaceship going my way and donít ever intend returning. How are you feeling now?î
ìFine! Splendid!î Now that the first discomfort had gone. Orloff found the low gravity exhilarating. He looked about him. The broken, hilly ground, bathed in a drenching yellow light, was covered with ground-hugging broad-leaved shrubs that showed the orderly arrangement of careful cultivation.
Birnam answered the unspoken question, ìThereís enough carbon dioxide in the air to keep the plants alive, and they all have the power to fix atmospheric nitrogen. Thatís what makes agriculture Ganymedeís greatest industry. Those plants are worth their weight in gold as fertilizers back on Earth and worth double or triple that as sources for half a hundred alkaloids that canít be gotten anywhere else in the System. And, of course, everyone knows that Ganymedan green-leaf has Terrestrial tobacco beat hollow.î
There was the drone of a strato-rocket overhead, shrill in the thin atmosphere, and Orloff looked up.
He stopped-stopped dead-and forgot to breathe!
It was his first glimpse of Jupiter in the sky.
It is one thing to see Jupiter, coldly harsh, against the ebon backdrop of space. At six hundred thousand miles, it is majestic enough. But on Ganymede, barely topping the hills, its outlines softened and ever so faintly hazed by the thin atmosphere; shining mellowly from a purple sky in which only a few fugitive stars dare compete with the Jovian giant-it can be described by no conceivable combination of words.
At first, Orloff absorbed the gibbous disk in silence. It was gigantic, thirty-two times the apparent diameter of the Sun as seen from Earth. Its stripes stood out in faint washes of color against the yellowness beneath and the Great Red Spot was an oval splotch of orange near the western rim.
And finally Orloff murmured weakly, ìItís beautiful!î
Leo Birnam stared, too, but there was no awe in his eyes. There was the mechanical weariness of viewing a sight often seen, and besides that an expression of sick revulsion. The chin flap hid his twitching smile, but his grasp upon Orloffís arm left bruises through the tough fabric of the surface suit.
He said slowly, ìItís the most horrible sight in the System.î
Orloff turned reluctant attention to his companion, ìEh?î Then, disagreeably, ìOh, yes, those mysterious Jovians.î
At that, the Ganymedan turned away angrily and broke into swinging, fifteen-foot strides. Orloff followed clumsily after, keeping his balance with difficulty.
ìHere, now,î he gasped.
But Birnam wasnít listening. He was speaking coldly, bitterly, ìYou on Earth can afford to ignore Jupiter. You know nothing of it. Itís a little pin prick in your sky, a little flyspeck. You donít live here on Ganymede, watching that damned colossus gloating over you. Up and over fifteen hours-hiding God knows what on its surface. Hiding something thatís waiting and waiting and trying to get out. Like a giant bomb just waiting to explode!î
ìNonsense!î Orloff managed to jerk out. ìWill you slow down. I canít keep up.î
Birnam cut his strides in half and said tensely, ìEveryone knows that Jupiter is inhabited, but practically no one ever stops to realize what that means. I tell you that those Jovians, whatever they are, are born to the purple. They are the natural rulers of the Solar System.î
ìPure hysteria,î muttered Orloff. ìThe Empire government has been hearing nothing else from your Dominion for a year.î
ìAnd youíve shrugged it oil. Well, listen! Jupiter, discounting the thickness of its colossal atmosphere, is eighty thousand miles in diameter. That means it possesses a surface one hundred times that of Earth, and more than fifty times that of the entire Terrestrial Empire. Its population, its resources. its war potential are in proportion.î
ìMere numbers-ì
ìI know what you mean,î Birnam drove on, passionately. ìWars are not fought with numbers, but with science and with organization. The Jovians have both. In the quarter of a century during which we have communicated with them, weíve learned a bit. They have atomic power and they have radio. And in a world of ammonia under great pressure-a world in other words in which almost none of the metals can exist as metals for any length of time because of the tendency to form soluble ammonia complexes-they have managed to build up a complicated civilization. That means they have had to work through plastics, glasses, silicates and synthetic building materials of one sort or another. That means a chemistry developed just as far as ours is, and r d put odds on its having developed further.î
Orloff waited long before answering. And then, ìBut how certain are you people about the Joviansí last message. We on Earth are inclined to doubt that the Jovians can possibly be as unreasonably belligerent as they have been described.î
The Ganymedan laughed shortly. ìThey broke oil all communication after that last message, didnít they? That doesnít sound friendly on their part, does it? I assure you that weíve all but stood on our ears trying to contact them.
ìHere now. donít talk. Let me explain something to you. For twenty-five years here on Ganymede a little group of men have worked their hearts out trying to make sense out of a static-ridden, gravity-distorted set of variable clicks in our radio apparatus. for those clicks were our only connection with living intelligence upon Jupiter. It was a job for a world of scientists, but we never had more than two dozen at the Station at anyone time. I was one of them from the very beginning and, as a philologist, did my part in helping construct and interpret the code that developed between ourselves and the Jovians, so that you can see I am speaking from the real inside.
ìIt was a devil of a heartbreaking job. It was five years before we got past the elementary clicks of arithmetic: three and four are seven; the square root of twenty-five is five; factorial six is seven hundred and twenty. After that, months sometimes passed before we could work out and check by further communication a single new fragment of thought.
ìBut- andthis is the point-by the time the Jovians broke off relations, we understood them thoroughly. There was no more chance of a mistake in comprehension, than there was of Ganymede suddenly cutting loose from Jupiter. And their last message was a threat, and a promise of destruction. Oh, thereís no doubt-thereís no doubt!î
They were walking through a shallow pass in which the yellow Jupiter light gave way to a clammy darkness.
Orloff was disturbed. He had never had the case presented to him in this fashion before. He said, ìBut the reason, man. What reason did we give them-î
ìNo reason! It was simply this: the Jovians had finally discovered from our messages-just where and how I donít know-that we were not Jovians.î
ìWell, of course.î
ìIt wasnít ëof courseí to them. In their experiences they had never come across intelligences that were not Jovian. Why should they make an exception in favor of those from outer space?î
ìYou say they were scientists.î Orloffís voice had assumed a wary frigidity. ëWouldnít they realize that alien environments would breed alien life? We knew it. We never thought the Jovians were Earthmen though we had never met intelligences other than those of Earth.î
They were back in the drenching wash of Jupiter light again, and a spreading region of ice glimmered amberly in a depression to the right.
Birnam answered, ìI said they were chemists and physicists-but I never said they were astronomers. Jupiter, my dear commissioner, has an atmosphere three thousand miles or more thick, and those miles of gas block off everything but the Sun and the four largest of Jupiterís moons. The Jovians know nothing of alien environments.î
Orloff considered. ìAnd so they decided we were aliens. What next?î
ìIf we werenít Jovians, then, in their eyes, we werenít people. It turned out that a non-Jovian was ëverminí by definition.î
Orloffís automatic protest was cut off short by Birnam, ëIn their eyes, I said, vermin we were; and vermin we are. Moreover, we were vermin with the peculiar audacity of having dared to attempt to treat with Jovians-with human beings. Their last message was this, word for word-íJovians are the masters. There is no room for vermin. We will destroy you immediately.í I doubt if there was any animosity in that message-simply a cold statement of fact. But they meant it. ì
ìBut why?î
ìWhy did man exterminate the housefly?î
ìCome, sir. Youíre not seriously presenting an analogy of that nature.î
ìWhy not, since it is certain that the Jovian considers us a sort of housefly-an insufferable type of housefly that dares aspire to intelligence.î
Orloff made a last attempt. ìBut truly, Mr. Secretary, it seems impossible for intelligent life to adopt such an attitude.î
ìDo you possess much of an acquaintance with any other type of intelligent life than our own?î came with immediate sarcasm. ìDo you feel competent to pass on Jovian psychology? Do you know just how alien Jovians must be physically? Just think of their world with its gravity at two and one half Earth normal; with its ammonia oceans-oceans that you might throw all Earth into without raising a respectable splash; with its three-thousand-mile atmosphere, dragged down by the colossal gravity into densities and pressures in its surface layers that make the sea bottoms of Earth resemble a medium-thick vacuum. I tell you weíve tried to figure out what sort of life could exist under those conditions and weíve given up. Itís thoroughly incomprehensible. Do you expect their mentality, then, to be any more understandable? Never! Accept it as it is. They intend destroying us. Thatís all we know and all we need to know.î
He lifted a gloved hand as he finished and one finger pointed. ìThereís Ether Station just ahead.î
Orloffís head swiveled, ìUnderground?î
ìCertainly! All except the Observatory. Thatís that steel and quartz dome to the right-the small one.î
They had stopped before two large boulders that flanked an earthy embankment, and from behind either one a nosepieced, suited soldier in Ganymedan orange, with blasters ready, advanced upon the two.
Birnam lifted his face into Jupiterís light and the soldiers saluted and stepped aside. A short word was barked into the wrist mike of one of them and the camouflaged opening between the boulders fell into two and Orloff followed the secretary into the yawning air lock. The Earthman caught one last glimpse of sprawling Jupiter before the closing door cut off the surface altogether.
It was no longer beautiful!
Orloff did not quite feel normal again until he had seated himself in the overstuffed chair in Dr. Edward Prosserís private office. With a sigh of utter relaxation, he propped his monocle under his eyebrow.
ìWould Dr. Prosser mind if I smoked in here, while weíre waiting?î he asked.
ìGo ahead, ì replied Birnam, carelessly. ìMy own idea would be to drag Prosser away from whatever heís fooling with just now, but heís a queer chap. Weíll get more out of him if we wait until heís ready for us.î He withdrew a gnarled stick of greenish tobacco from its case, and bit off the edge viciously.
Orloff smiled through the smoke of his own cigarette, ìI donít mind waiting. I still have something to say. You see, for the moment, Mr. Secretary, you gave me the jitters, but, after all, granted that the Jovians intend mischief once they get at us, it remains a fact, ì and here he spaced his words emphatically, ìthat they canít get at us.î
ìA bomb without a fuse, hey?î
ìExactly! Itís simplicity itself, and not really worth discussing. You will admit, I suppose, that under no circumstances call the Jovians get away from Jupiter.î
ìUnder no circumstances?î There was a quizzical tinge in Birnamís slow reply. ìShall we analyze that?î
He stared hard at the purple flame of his cigar. ìItís an old trite saying that the Jovians canít leave Jupiter. The fact has been highly publicized by the sensation mongers of Earth and Ganymede and a great deal of sentiment has been driveled about the unfortunate intelligences who are irrevocably surface-bound, and must forever stare into the Universe without, watching, watching, wondering, and never attaining.
ìBut, after all, what holds the Jovians to their planet? Two factors! Thatís all! The first is the immense gravity field of the planet. Two and a half Earth normal.î
Orloff nodded. ìPretty bad!î he agreed.
ìAnd Jupiterís gravitational potential is even worse, for because of its greater diameter the intensity of its gravitational field decreases with distance only one tenth as rapidly as Earthís field does. Itís a terrible problem-but ití sbeen solved.î
ìHey?î Orloff straightened.
ìTheyíve got atomic power. Gravity-even Jupiterís-means nothing once youíve put unstable atomic nuclei to work for you.î
Orloff crushed his cigarette to extinction with a nervous gesture. ìBut their atmosphere-î
ìYes, thatís whatís stopping them. Theyíre living at the bottom of a three-thousand-mile-deep ocean of it, where the hydrogen of which it is composed is collapsed by sheer pressure to something approaching the density of solid hydrogen. It stays a gas because the temperature of Jupiter is above the critical point of hydrogen, but you just try to figure out the pressure that can make hydrogen gas half as heavy as water. Youíll be surprised at the number of zeros youíll have to put down.
ìNo spaceship of metal or of any kind of matter can stand that pressure. No Terrestrial spaceship can land on Jupiter without smashing like an eggshell, and no Jovian spaceship can leave Jupiter without exploding like a soap bubble. That problem has not yet been solved, but it will be some day. Maybe tomorrow, maybe not for a hundred years, or a thousand. We donít know, but when it is solved, the Jovians will be on top of us. And it can be solved in a specific way.î
ìI donít see how-ì
ìForce fields! Weíve got them now, you know.î
ìForce fields!î Orloff seemed genuinely astonished, and he chewed the word over and over to himself for a few moments. ìTheyíre used as meteor shields for ships in the asteroid zone-but I donít see the application to the Jovian problem.î
ìThe ordinary force field,î explained Birnam, ìis a feeble rarefied zone of energy extending over a hundred miles or more outside the ship. Itíll stop meteors but itís just so much empty ether to an object like a gas molecule. But what if you took that same zone of energy and compressed it to a thickness of a tenth of an inch. Molecules would bounce offit like this- ping-g-g-g! And if you used stronger generators, and compressed the field to a hundredth of an inch, molecules would bounce offeven when driven by the unthinkable pressure of Jupiterís atmosphere-and then if you build a ship inside-î He left the sentence dangling.
Orloff was pale. ìYouíre not saying it can be done?î
ìIíll bet you anything you like that the Jovians are trying to do it. And weíre trying to do it right here at Ether Station.î
The colonial commissioner jerked his chair closer to Birnam and grabbed the Ganymedanís wrist. ìWhy canít we bombard Jupiter with atomic bombs. Give it a thorough going-over, I mean! With her gravity, and her surface area, we canít miss.î
Birnam smiled faintly, ìWeíve thought of that. But atomic bombs would merely tear holes in the atmosphere. And even if you could penetrate, just divide the surface of Jupiter by the area of damage of a single bomb and find how many years we must bombard Jupiter at the rate of a bomb a minute before we begin to do significant damage. Jupiterís big! Donít ever forget that!î
His cigar had gone out, but he did not pause to relight. He continued in a low, tense voice. ìNo, we canít attack the Jovians as long as theyíre on Jupiter. We must wait for them to come out-and once they do, theyíre going to have the edge on us in numbers. A terrific, heart-breaking edge-so weíll just have to have the edge on them in scienceÖ
ìBut,î Orloff broke in, and there was a note of fascinated horror in his voice, ìhow can we tell in advance what theyíll have?î
ìWe canít. Weíve got to scrape up everything we can lay our hands on and hope for the best. But thereís one thing we do know theyíll have, and thatís force fields. They canít get out without them. And if they have them, we must, too, and thatís the problem weíre trying to solve here. They will not insure us victory, but without them, we will suffer certain defeat. And now you know why we need money-and more than that. We want Earth itself to get to work. Itís got to start a drive for scientific armaments and subordinate everything to that. You seer
Orloff was on his feet. ìBirnam, Iím with you-a hundred percent with you. You can count on me back in Washington.î
There was no mistaking his sincerity. Birnam gripped the hand outstretched toward him and wrung it-and at the moment, the door flew open and a little pixie of a man hurtled in.
The newcomer spoke in rapid jerks, and exclusively to Birnam. ìWhereíd you come from? Been trying to get in touch with you. Secretary said you werenít in. Then five minutes later you show up on your own. Canít understand it.î He busied himself furiously at his desk.
Birnam grinned. ìIf youíll take time out, doc, you might say hello to Colonial Commissioner OrloffÖ
Dr. Edward Prosser turned on his toe like a ballet dancer and looked the Earthman up and down twice. ìThe new un, hey? We getting any money? We ought to. Been working on a shoestring ever since. At that, we might not be needing any. It depends.î He was back at the desk.
Orloff seemed a trifle disconcerted, but Birnam winked impressively, and he contented himself with a glassy stare through the monocle.
Prosser pounced upon a black leather booklet in the recesses of a pigeonhole, threw himself into his swivel chair and wheeled about.
ìGlad you came, Birnam,î he said, leafing through the booklet. ìGot something to show you. Commissioner Orloff, too.î
ìWhat were you keeping us waiting for?î demanded Birnam. ìWhere were you?î
ìBusy! Busy as a pig! No sleep for three nights.î He looked up, and his small puckered face fairly Hushed with delight. ìEverything fell into place of a sudden. Like a jig-saw puzzle. Never saw anything like it. Kept us hopping, I tell you.î
ìYouíve gotten the dense force fields youíre after?î asked Orloff in sudden excitement.
Prosser seemed annoyed. ìNo, not that. Something else. Come on.î He glared at his watch and jumped out of his seat. ìWeíve got half an hour. Letís go.î
An electric-motored flivver waited outside and Prosser spoke excitedly as he sped the purring vehicle down the ramps into the depths of the Station.
ìTheory!î he said. ìTheory! Damned important, that. You set a technician on a problem. Heíll fool around. Waste lifetimes. Get nowhere. Just putter about at random. A true scientist works with theory. Lets math solve his problems.î He overflowed with self-satisfaction.
The flivver stopped on a dime before a huge double door and Prosser tumbled out, followed by the other two at a more leisurely pace.
ìThrough here! Through here!î he said. He shoved the door open and led them down the corridor and up a narrow flight of stairs onto a wall-hugging passageway that circled a huge three-level room. Orloff recognized the gleaming quartz-and-steel pipe-sprouting ellipsoid two levels below as an atomic generator.
He adjusted his monocle and watched the scurrying activity below. An earphoned man on a high stool before a control board studded with dials looked up and waved. Prosser waved back and grinned.
Orloff said, ìYou create your force fields here?î
ìThatís right! Ever see one?î
ìNo.î The commissioner smiled, ruefully. ìI donít even know what one is, except that it can be used as a meteor shield.î
Prosser said, ìItís very simple. Elementary matter. All matter is composed of atoms. Atoms are held together by interatomic forces. Take away atoms. Leave interatomic forces behind. Thatís a force field.î
Orloff looked blank, and Birnam chuckled deep in his throat and scratched the back of his ear.
ìThat explanation reminds me of our Ganymedan method of suspending an egg a mile high in the air. It goes like this. You find a mountain just a mile high and put the egg on top. Then, keeping the egg where it is, you take the mountain away. Thatís all.î
The colonial commissioner threw his head back to laugh, and the irascible Dr. Prosser puckered his lips in a pursed symbol of disapproval.
ìCome, come. No joke, you know. Force fields most important. Got to be ready for the Jovians when they come:í
A sudden rasping bur from below sent Prosser back from the railing.
ìGet behind screen here,î he babbled. ìThe twenty-millimeter field is going up. Bad radiation.î
The bur muted almost into silence, and the three walked out onto the passageway again. There was no apparent change, but Prosser shoved his hand out over the railing and said, ìFeel!î
Orloff extended a cautious finger, gasped, and slapped out with the palm of his hand. It was like pushing against very soft sponge rubber or superresilient steel springs.
Birnam tried, too. ìThatís better than anything weíve done yet, isnít it?î He explained to Orloff, ì A twenty-millimeter screen is one that can hold an atmosphere of a pressure of twenty millimeters of mercury against a vacuum without appreciable leakage.î
The commissioner nodded, ìI see! Youí d need a seven-hundred-sixty-millimeter screen to hold Earthís atmosphere then.î
ìYes! That would be a unit atmosphere screen. Well, Prosser, is this what got you excited?î
ìThis twenty-millimeter screen? Of course not. I can go up to two hundred fifty millimeters using the activated vanadium pentasulphide in the praseodymium breakdown. But itís not necessary. Technician would do it and blow up the place. Scientist checks on theory and goes slow.î He winked. ëWeíre hardening the field now. Watch!î
ìShall we get behind the screen?î
ìNot necessary now. Radiation bad only at beginningÖ
The burring waxed again, but not as loudly as before. Prosser shouted to the man at the control board, and a spreading wave of the hand was the only reply.
Then the control man waved a clenched fist and Prosser cried, ìWeíve passed fifty millimeters! Feel the field!î
Orloff extended his hand and poked it curiously. The sponge rubber had hardened! He tried to pinch it between finger and thumb so perfect was the illusion, but here the ìrubberÖ faded to unresisting air.
Prosser tch-tched impatiently. ìNo resistance at right angles to force. Elementary mechanics, that isÖ
The control man was gesturing again. ìPast seventy,î explained Prosser. ìWeíre slowing down now. Critical point is 83.42.î
He hung over the railing and kicked out with his feet at the other two. ìStay away! Dangerous!î
And then he yelled, ìCareful! The generatorís bucking!î
The bur had risen to a hoarse rnaximum and the control man worked frantically at his switches. From within the quartz heart of the central atomic generator, the sullen red glow of the bursting atoms had brightened dangerously.
There was a break in the bur, a reverberant roar, and a blast of air that threw Orloff hard against the wall.
Prosser dashed up. There was a cut over his eye. ìHurt? No? Good, good! I was expecting something of the sort. Should have warned you. Letís go down. Whereís Birnam?î
The tall Ganymedan picked herself up off the floor and brushed at his clothes. ìHere I am. What blew up?î
ìNothing blew up. Something buckled. Come on, down we go.î He debbed at his forehead with a handkerchief and led the way downward.
The control man removed his earphones as he approached and got off his stool. He looked tired, and his dirt-smeared face was greasy with perspiration.
ìThe damn thing started going at 82.8, boss. It almost caught me.î
ìIt did, did it?î growled Prosser. ìWithin limits of error, isnít it? Howís the generator? Hey, Stoddard!î
The technician addressed replied from his station at the generator, ìTube 5 died. Itíll take two days to replace.î
Prosser turned in satisfaction and said, ìIt worked. Went exactly as presumed. Problem solved, gentlemen. Trouble over. Letís get back to my office. I want to eat. And then I want to sleep.î
He did not refer to the subject again until once more behind the desk in his office, and then he spoke between huge bites of a liver-and-onion sandwich.
He addressed Birnam, ìRemember the work on space strain last June. It Hopped, but we kept at it. Finch got a lead last week and I developed it. Everything fell into place. Slick as goose grease. Never saw anything like it.î
ìGo ahead,î said Birnam, calmly. He knew Prosser sufficiently well to avoid showing impatience.
ìYou saw what happened. When a field tops 83.42 millimeters, it becomes unstable. Space wonít stand the strain. It buckles and the field blows. Boom/î
Birnamís mouth dropped open and the arms of Orloffís chair creaked under sudden pressure. Silence for a while, and then Birnam said unsteadily, ìYou mean force fields stronger than that are impossible?î
ìTheyíre possible. You can create them. But the denser they are, the more unstable they are. If I had turned on the two-hundred-and-fifty-millimeter field, it would have lasted one tenth of a second. Then, blooie! Would have blown up the Station! And myself! Technician would have done it. Scientist is warned by theory. Works carefully, the way I did. No harm done.î
Orloff tucked his monocle into his vest pocket and said tremulously, ìBut if a force field is the same thing as interatomic forces, why is it that steel has such a strong interatomic binding force without bucking space? Thereís a Haw there.î
Prosser eyed him in annoyance. ìNo Haw. Critical strength depends on number of generators. In steel, each atom is a force-field generator. That means about three hundred billion trillion generators for every ounce of matter. If we could use that many-As it is, one hundred generators would be the practical limit. That only raises the critical point to ninety-seven or thereabout.î
He got to his feet and continued with sudden fervor, ìNo. Problemís over, I tell you. Absolutely impossible to create a force field capable of holding Earthís atmosphere for more than a hundredth of a second. Jovian atmosphere entirely out of question. Cold figures say that; backed by experiment. Space wonít stand it!
ìLet the Jovians do their damnedest. They canít get out! Thatís final! Thatís final! Thatís final!î
Orloff said, ìMr. Secretary, can I send a spacegram anywhere in the Station? I want to tell Earth that Iím returning by the next ship and that the Jovian problem is liquidated-entirely and for good.î
Birnam said nothing, but the relief of his face as he shook hands with the colonial commissioner, transfigured the gaunt homeliness of it unbelievably.
And Dr. Prosser repeated, with a birdlike jerk of his head, ìThatís final!î
Hal Tuttle looked up as Captain Everett of the spaceship Transparent, newest ship of the Comet Space Lines, entered his private observation room in the nose of the ship.
The captain said, ì A spacegram has just reached me from the home offices at Tucson. Weíre to pick up Colonial Commissioner Orloff at Jovopolis, Ganymede, and take him back to Earth.î
ìGood. We havenít sighted any ships?î
ìNo, no! Weíre way off the regular space lanes. The first the System will know of us will be the landing of the Transparent on Ganymede. It will be the greatest thing in space travel since the first trip to the Moon.î His voice softened suddenly, ìWhatís wrong, Hal? This is your triumph, after all:í
Hal Tuttle looked up and out into the blackness of space. ìI suppose it is. Ten years of work, Sam. I lost an arm and an eye in that first explosion, but I donít regret them. Itís the reaction thatís got me. The problem is solved; my lifework is finished. ì
ìSo is every steel-hulled ship in the System.î
Tuttle smiled. ìYes. Itís hard to realize, isnít it?î He gestured outward. ìYou see the stars? Part of the time, thereís nothing between them and us. It gives me a queazy feeling.î His voice brooded, ìNine years I worked for nothing. I wasnít a theoretician, and never really knew where I was headed-just tried everything. I tried a little too hard and space wouldnít stand it. I paid an arm and an eye and started fresh.î
Captain Everett balled his fist and pounded the hull-the hull through which the stars shone unobstructed. There was the muffled thud of flesh striking an unyielding surface-but no response whatever from the invisible wall.
Tuttle nodded, ìItís solid enough, now-though it flicks on and off eight hundred thousand times a second. I got the idea from the stroboscopic lamp. You know them-they flash on and off so rapidly that it gives all the impression of steady illumination.
ìAnd so it is with the hull. Itís not on long enough to buckle space. Itís not off long enough to allow appreciable leakage of the atmosphere. And the net effect is a strength better than steel.î
He paused and added slowly, ìAnd thereís no telling how far we can go. Speed up the intermission effect. Have the field flick off and on millions of times per second-billions of times. You can get fields strong enough to hold an atomic explosion. My lifework!î
Captain Everett pounded the otherís shoulder. ìSnap out of it, man. Think of the landing on Ganymede. The devil! It will be great publicity. Think of Orloffís face, for instance, when he finds he is to be the first passenger in history ever to travel in a spaceship with a force-field hull. How do you suppose heíll feel?î
Hal Tuttle shrugged. ìI imagine heíll be rather pleased.î



***



With ìNot Final!î I completed my third year as a writer-three years since my initial trip to Campbellís office. In that time I had earned just a hair short of a thousand dollars (not as bad as it sounds in days when college tuition was only four hundred dollars a year) and I had about a quarter of that in my savings account.
Still, you can see that there was nothing in that financial record to lead me to think that writing was a possible way of making a living-especially since I had no dream of ever writing anything but magazine science fiction.
On June 10, 1941, in the course of a talk with Fred Pohl, I mentioned my frustration at not being able to make a sale to Unknown. Fred said he had a good idea for a fantasy, and from that it was a short step to an agreement to go halfies. Weí d talk the idea over, I would write it, and weíd split the sale, if any, fifty-fifty.
Fred must have been willing because (as I found out three days later) his magazines were doing poorly and he was being relieved of his editorial position.
It was too bad, of course, but not an irredeemable catastrophe. Pohl had had nearly two years of valuable editorial experience, and the time would come when this would stand him in good stead in a much more important and longer-enduring role as editor of Galaxy, which during the 1950s and 1960s was to compete with Astounding for leadership in the field.
As for myself, I could scarcely complain. Pohl had accepted eight of my stories (over a quarter of those I had written and nearly half of those I had sold up to then).of these, six had already been published and one (ìSuper-Neutronî) was safely slated for publication in the forthcoming issue of Astonishing. That left the ninth, ìChristmas on Ganymede.î It was not yet paid for, nor had it actually been set in type, and, regretfully, Pohl had to return it. However, I sold it within two weeks to Thrilling Wonder Stories for a little more than Pohl would have been able to pay me, so no harm was done even there.-and though I regretted the loss of a market, Pohl had safely seen me through the period during which I developed to the point where Campbell and Astounding itself could become my major market.
At first, when ìChristmas on Ganymedeî was returned, I thought it was because the Pohl magazines had been suspended altogether. If the publishers had intended that, they changed their minds. Astonishing continued a couple of years, until it was killed by the World War II paper shortage. Super Science Stories survived World War II and even a little past the 1940s, and was yet to publish one more story of mine.
But back to June 10-Taking Fredís fantasy idea, I wrote the story entirely on my own, calling it ìLegal Rights.î Once again, though, a collaboration didnít succeed. On July 8, Campbell rejected it, the first rejection I had received from him in half a year.
By that time, though, Fred was agenting again. I gave him the story, rather shamefacedly, and forgot about it. He changed the name to ìLegal Ritesî (much better) and rewrote it quite a bit. Seven years later, he actually sold it.








Legal Rites








(with James MacCreigh)







I


Already the stars were out, though the sun had just dipped under the horizon, and the sky of the west was a blood-stuck gold behind the Sierra Nevadas.
ìHey!î squawked Russell Harley. ìCome back!î
But the one-lunged motor of the old Ford was making too much noise; the driver didnít hear him. Harley cursed as he watched the old car careen along the sandy ruts on its half-flat tires. Its taillight was saying a red no to him. No, you canít get away tonight; no, youíll have to stay here and fight it out.
Harley grunted and climbed back up the porch stairs of the old wooden house. It was well made, anyhow. The stairs, though half a century old, neither creaked beneath him nor showed cracks.
Harley picked up the bags heíd dropped when he experienced his abrupt change of mind-fake leather and worn out, they were-and carted them into the house. He dumped them on a dust-jacketed sofa and looked around.
It was stifling hot, and the smell of the desert outside had permeated the room. Harley sneezed.
ìWater,î he said out loud. ìThatís what I need.î
Heíd prowled through every room on the ground floor before he stopped still and smote his head. Plumbing-naturally thereíd be no plumbing in this hole eight miles out on the desert! A well was the best he could hope for
If that.
It was getting dark. No electric lights either, of course. He blundered irritatedly through the dusky rooms to the back of the house. The screen door shrieked metallically as he opened it. A bucket hung by the door. He picked it up, tipped it, shook the loose sand out of it. He looked over the ìback yardî-about thirty thousand visible acres of hilly sand, rock and patches of sage and flame-tipped ocotillo.
No well.
The old fool got water from somewhere, he thought savagely. Obstinately he climbed down the back steps and wandered out into the desert. Overhead the stars were blinding, a million billion of them, but the sunset was over already and he could see only hazily. The silence was murderous. Only a faint whisper of breeze over the sand, and the slither of his shoes.
He caught a glimmer of starlight from the nearest clump of sage and walked to it. There was a pool of water, caught in the angle of two enormous boulders. He stared at it doubtfully, then shrugged. It was water. It was better than nothing. He dipped the bucket in the little pool. Knowing nothing of the procedure, he filled it with a quart of loose sand as he scooped it along the bottom. When he lifted it, brimful, to his lips, he spat out the first mouthful and swore violently.
Then he used his head. He set the bucket down, waited a second for the sand grains to settle, cupped water in his hands, lifted it to his lipsÖ
Pat. HISS. Pat. HISS. Pat. HISS-
îWhat the hell!î Harley stood up, looked around in abrupt puzzlement. It sounded like water dripping from somewhere, onto a redhot stove, Hashing into sizzling steam. He saw nothing, only the sand and the sage and the pool of tepid, sickly water.
Pat. HISS
Then he saw it, and his eyes bulged. Out of nowhere it was dripping, a drop a second, a sticky, dark drop that was thicker than water, that fell to the ground lazily, in slow defiance of gravity. And when it struck each drop sizzled and skittered about, and vanished. It was perhaps eight feet from him, just visible in the starlight.
And then, ìGet off my land!î said the voice from nowhere.
Harley got. By the time he got to Rebel Butte three hours later, he was barely managing to walk, wishing desperately that heíd delayed long enough for one more good drink of water, despite all the fiends of hell. But heíd run the first three miles. Heíd had plenty of encouragement. He remembered with a shudder how the clear desert air had taken milkly shape around the incredible trickle of dampness and had advanced on him threateningly.
And when he got to the first kerosene-lighted saloon of Rebel Butte, and staggered inside, the saloonkeeperís fascinated stare at the front of his shoddy coat showed him strong evidence that he hadnít been suddenly taken with insanity, or drunk on the unaccustomed sensation of fresh desert air. All down the front of him it was, and the harder he rubbed the harder it stayed, the stickier it got. Blood!
ìWhiskey!î he said in a strangled voice, tottering to the bar. He pulled a threadbare dollar bill from his pocket, flapped it onto the mahogany.
The blackjack game at the back of the room had stopped. Harley was acutely conscious of the eyes of the players, the bartender and the tall, lean man leaning on the bar. All were watching him.
The bartender broke the spell. He reached for a bottle behind him without looking at it, placed it on the counter before Harley. He poured a glass of water from a jug, set it down with a shot glass beside the bottle.
ìI could of told you that would happen, ì he said casually. ìOnly you wouldnít of believed me. You had to meet Hank for yourself before youíd believe he was there:í
Harley remembered his thirst and drained the glass of water, then poured himself a shot of the whiskey and swallowed it without waiting for the chaser to be refilled. The whiskey felt good going down, almost good enough to stop his internal shakes.
ìWhat are you talking about?î he said finally. He twisted his body and leaned forward across the bar to partly hide the stains on his coat. The saloonkeeper laughed.
ìOld Hank,î he said. ìI knowed who you was right away, even before Tom came back and told me where heíd took you. I knowed you was Zeb Harleyís no-good nephew, come to take Harley Hall aní sell it before he was cold in the grave.î
The blackjack players were still watching him, Russell Harley saw. Only the lean man farther along the bar seemed to have dismissed him. He was pouring himself another drink, quite occupied with his task.
Harley flushed. ìListen,î he said, ìI didnít come in here for advice. I wanted a drink. Iím paying for it. Keep your mouth out of this.î
The saloonkeeper shrugged. He turned his back and walked away to the blackjack table. After a couple of seconds one of the players turned, too, and threw a card down. The others followed suit.
Harley was just getting set to swallow his pride and talk to the saloonkeeper again-he seemed to know something about what Harleyíd been through, and might be helpful-when the lean man tapped his shoulder. Harley whirled and almost dropped his glass. Absorbed and jumpy, he hadnít seen him come up.
ìYoung man, ì said the lean one, ìMy nameís Nicholls. Come along with me, sir, and weíll talk this thing over. I think we may be of service to each other.î
Even the twelve-cylinder car Nicholls drove jounced like a haywagon over the sandy ruts leading to the place old Zeb had-laughingly-named ìHarley Hall.î
Russell Harley twisted his neck and stared at the heap of paraphernalia in the open rumble seat. ìI donít like it, ì he complained. ìI never had anything to do with ghosts. How do I know this stuffíll work?î
Nicholls smiled. ìYouíll have to take my word for it. Iíve had dealings with ghosts before. You could say that I might qualify as a ghost exterminator, if I chose.î
Harley growled. ìI still donít like it.î Nicholls turned a sharp look on him. ìYou like the prospect of owning Harley Hall, donít you? And looking for all the money your late uncle is supposed to have hidden around somewhere?î Harley shrugged. ìCertainly you do,î said Nicholls, returning his eyes to the road. ì And with good reason. The local reports put the figure pretty high, young man.î
ìThatís where you come in, I guess,î Harley said sullenly. ìI find the money-that I own anyhow-and give some of it to you. How much?î
ìWeíll discuss that later,î Nicholls said. He smiled absently as he looked ahead.
ìWeíll discuss it right now!î
The smile faded from Nichollsí face. ìNo,î he said. ìWe wonít. Iíve doing you a favor, young Harley. Remember that. In return-youíll do as I say, all the way!î
Harley digested that carefully, and it was not a pleasant meal. He waited a couple of seconds before he changed the subject.
ìI was out here once when the old man was alive,î he said. ìHe didnít say nothing about any ghost. ì
ìPerhaps he felt you might think him-well, peculiar,î Nicholls said. ìAnd perhaps you would have. When were you here?î
ìOh, a long time ago,î Harley said evasively. ìBut I was here a whole day, and part of the night. The old man was crazy as a coot, but he didnít keep any ghosts in the atticÖ
ìThis ghost was a friend of his.î Nicholls said. ìThe gentleman in charge of the bar told you that. surely. Your late uncle was something of a recluse. He lived in this house a dozen miles from nowhere. came into town hardly ever. Wouldnít let anyone get friendly with him. But he wasnít exactly a hermit. He had Hank for company.î
ìFine companyÖ
Nicholls inclined his head seriously. ìOh, I donít know.î he said. ìFrom all accounts, they got on well together. They played pinochle and chess-Hankís supposed to have been a great pinochle player. He was killed that way, according to the local reports. Caught somebody dealing from the bottom and shot it out with him. He lost. A bullet pierced his throat and he died quite bloodilyÖ He turned the wheel, putting his weight into the effort, and succeeded in twisting the car out of the ruts of the ìroad, ì sent it jouncing across unmarked sand to the old frame house to which they were going.
ìThat,î he finished as he pulled up before the porch. ìAccounts for the blood that accompanies his apparitionÖ
Harley opened the door slowly and got out, looking uneasily at the battered old house. Nicholls cut the motor, got out and walked at once to the back of the car.
ìCome on.î he said, dragging things out of the compartment. ìGive me a hand with this. Iíve not going to carry this stuff all by myselfÖ
Harley came around reluctantly, regarded the curious assortment of bundles of dried faggots, lengths of colored cord, chalk pencils, ugly little bunches of wilted weeds, bleached bones of small animals and a couple of less pleasant things without pleasure.
Pat. HISS. Pat. HISS-
îHeís here!î Harley yelped. ìListen! Heís someplace around here watching us.î
ìHa!î
The laugh was deep, unpleasant and-bodiless. Harley looked around desperately for the tell-tale trickle of blood. And he found it; from the air it issued, just beside the car, sinking gracefully to the ground and sizzling, vanishing, there.
ìIím watching you, all right,î the voice said grimly. ìRussell, you worthless piece of corruption, Iíve got no more use for you than you used to have for me. Dead or alive, this is my land! I shared it with your uncle, you young scalawag, but I wonít share it with you. Get out!î
Harleyís knees weakened and he tottered dizzily to the rear bumper, sat on it. ìNicholls-î he said confusedly.
ìOh, brace up,î Nicholls said with irritation. He tossed a ball of gaudy twine, red and green, with curious knots tied along it, to Harley. Then he confronted the trickle of blood and made a few brisk passes in the air before it. His lips were moving silently, Harley saw, but no words came out.
There was a gasp and a chopped-off squawk from the source of the blood drops. Nicholls clapped his hands sharply, then turned to young Harley.
ìTake that cord you have in your hands and stretch it around the house,î he said. ì All the way around, and make sure it goes right across the middle of the doors and windows. Itisnít much, but itíll hold him till we can get the good stuff set up.î
Harley nodded, then pointed a rigid finger at the drops of blood, now sizzling and fuming more angrily than before. ìWhat about that?î he managed to get out.
Nicholls grinned complacently. ìIíll hold him here till the cows come home,î he said. ìGet moving!î
Harley inadvertently inhaled a lungful of noxious white smoke and coughed till the tears rolled down his cheeks. When he recovered he looked at Nicholls, who was reading silently from a green leather book with dog-eared pages. He said, ìCan I stop stirring this now?î
Nicholls grimaced angrily and shook his head without looking at him. He went on reading, his lips contorting over syllables that were not in any language Harley had ever heard, then snapped the book shut and wiped his brow.
ìFine,î he said. ìSo far, so good.î He stepped over to windward of the boiling pot Harley was stirring on the hob over the fireplace, peered down into it cautiously.
ìThatís about done,î he said. ìTake it off the fire and let it cool a bit.î
Harley lifted it down, then squeezed his aching biceps with his left hand. The stuff was the consistency of sickly green fudge.
ìNow what?î he asked.
Nicholls didnít answer. He looked up in mild surprise at the sudden squawk of triumph from outside, followed by the howling of a chill wind.
ìHank must be loose,î he said casually. ìHe canít do us any harm, I think, but weíd better get a move on.î He rummaged in the dwindled pile of junk heíd brought from the car, extracted a paintbrush. ìSmear this stuff around all the windows and doors. All but the front door. For that I have something else.î He pointed to what seemed to be the front axle of an old Model-T. îLeave that on the doorsill. Cold iron. You can just step over it, but Hank wonít be able to pass it. Itís been properly treated already with the very best thaumaturgy.î
ìStep over it, ì Harley repeated. ìWhat would I want to step over it for? Heís out there.î
ìHe wonít hurt you,î said Nicholls. ìYou will carry an amulet with you-that one, there-that will keep him away. Probably he couldnít really hurt you anyhow, being a low-order ghost who canít materialize to any great density. But just to take no chances, carry the amulet and donít stay out too long. It wonít hold him off forever, not for more than half an hour. If you ever have to go out and stay for any length of time, tie that bundle of herbs around your neck.î Nicholls smiled. ìThatís only for emergencies, though. It works on the asafoetida principle. Ghosts canít come anywhere near it-but you wonít like it much yourself. It has-ah-a rather definite odor.î
He leaned gingerly over the pot again, sniffing. He sneezed.
ìWell, thatís cool enough,î he said. ìBefore it hardens, get moving. Start spreading the stuff upstairs-and make sure you donít miss any windows.î
ìWhat are you going to do?î
ìI,î said Nicholls sharply, ìwill be here. Start.î
But he wasnít. When Harley finished his disagreeable task and came down, he called Nichollsí name, but the man was gone. Hurley stepped to the door and looked out; the car was gone, too.
He shrugged. ìOh, well, ì he said, and began taking the dust-cloths off the furniture.








II


Somewhere within the cold, legal mind of Lawyer Turnbull, he weighed the comparative likeness of nightmare and insanity.
He stared at the plush chair facing him, noted with distinct uneasiness how the strangely weightless, strangely sourceless trickle of redness disappeared as it hit the floor, but left long, mud-ochre streaks matted on the upholstery. The sound was unpleasant, too; Pat. HISS. Pat. HISS-
The voice continued impatiently, ìDamn your human stupidity! I may be a ghost, but heaven knows Iím not trying to haunt you. Friend, youíre not that important to me. Get this-Iím here on business.î
Turnbull learned that you cannot wet dry lips with a dehydrated tongue. ìLegal business?î
ìSure. The fact that I was once killed by violence, and have to continue my existence on the astral plane, doesnít mean Iíve lost my legal rights. Does it?î
The lawyer shook his head in bafflement. He said, ìThis would be easier on me if you werenít invisible. Canít you do something about it?î
There was a short pause. ëWell, I could materialize for a minute,î the voice said. ìItís hard work-damn hard, for me. There are a lot of us astral entities that can do it easy as failing out of bed, but-Well, if I have to I shall try to do it once.î
There was a shimmering in the air above the armchair, and a milky, thin smoke condensed into an intangible seated figure. Turnbull took no delight in noting that, through the figure, the outlines of the chair were still hazily visible. The figure thickened. Just as the features took form-just as Turnbullís bulging eyes made out a prominent hooked nose and a crisp beard-it thinned and exploded with a soft pop.
The voice said weakly, ìI didnít think I was that bad. Iím way out of practice. I guess thatís the first daylight materialization Iíve made in seventy-five years.î
The lawyer adjusted his rimless glasses and coughed. Hellís binges, he thought, the worst thing about this is that Iím believing it!î
ìOh, well, ì he said aloud. Then he hurried on before the visitor could take offense: ìJust what did you want? Iím just a small-town lawyer, you know. My business is fairly routine-î
ìI know all about your business,î the voice said. ìYou can handle my case-itís a land affair. I want to sue Russell Harley.î
ìHarley?î Turnbull fingered his cheek. ì Any relation to Zeb Harley?î
ìHis nephew-and his heir, too.î
Turnbull nodded. ìYes, I remember now. My wifeís folks live in Rebel Butte, and Iíve been there. Quite a coincidence you should come to me-ì
The voice laughed. ìIt was no coincidence,î it said softly.
ìOh.î Turnbull was silent for a second. Then, ìI see,î he said. He cast a shrewd glance at the chair. ìLawsuits cost money, Mr.-I donít think you mentioned your name?î
ìHank Jenkins,î the voice prompted. ìI know that. Would-letís see. Would six hundred and fifty dollars be sufficient?î
Turnbull swallowed. ìI think so,î he said in a relatively unemotional tone-relative to what he was thinking.
ìThen suppose we call that your retainer. I happen to have cached a considerable sum in gold when I was-that is to say, before I became an astral entity. Iím quite certain it hasnít been disturbed. You will have to call it treasure trove, I guess, and give half of it to the state, but thereís thirteen hundred dollars altogether.î
Turnbull nodded judiciously. ìAssuming we can locate your trove,î he said, ìI think that would be quite satisfactory.î He leaned back in his chair and looked legal. His aplomb had returned.
And half an hour later he said slowly, ìIíll take your case.î
Judge Lawrence Gimbel had always liked his job before. But his thirteen honorable years on the bench lost their flavor for him as he grimaced wearily and reached for his gavel. This case was far too confusing for his taste.
The clerk made his speech, and the packed courtroom sat down en masse. Gimbel held a hand briefly to his eyes before he spoke.
ìIs the counsel for the plaintiff ready?î
ìI am, your honor.î Turnbull, alone at his table, rose and bowed.
ìThe counsel for the defendant?î
ìReady, your honor!î Fred Wilson snapped. He looked with a hard flicker of interest at Turnbull and his solitary table, then leaned over and whispered in Russell Harleyís ear. The youth nodded glumly, then shrugged.
Gimbel said, ìI understand the attorneys for both sides have waived jury trial in this case of Henry Jenkins versus Russell Joseph Harley.î
Both lawyers nodded. Gimbel continued, ìIn view of the unusual nature of this case, I imagine it will prove necessary to conduct it with a certain amount of informality. The sole purpose of this court is to arrive at the true facts at issue, and to deliver a verdict in accord with the laws pertaining to these facts. I will not stand on ceremony. Nevertheless, I will not tolerate any disturbances or unnecessary irregularities. The spectators will kindly remember that they are here on privilege. Any demonstration will result in the clearing of the court.î
He looked severely at the white faces that gleamed unintelligently up at him. He suppressed a sigh as he said, ìThe counsel for the plaintiff will begin.î
Turnbull rose quickly to his feet, faced the judge.
ìYour honor,î he said, ìwe propose to show that my client, Henry Jenkins, has been deprived of his just rights by the defendant. Mr. Jenkins, by virtue of a sustained residence of more than twenty years in the house located on Route 22, eight miles north of the town of Rebel Butte, with the full knowledge of its legal owner, has acquired certain rights. In legal terminology we define these as the rights of adverse possession. The layman would call them common-law rights-squattersí rights.î
Gimbel folded his hands and tried to relax. Squattersí rights-for a ghost! He sighed, but listened attentively as Turnbull went on.
ìUpon the death of Zebulon Harley, the owner of the house involved-it is better known, perhaps, as Harley Hall-the defendant inherited title to the property. We do not question his right to it. But my client has an equity in Harley Hall; the right to free and full existence. The defendant has forcefully evicted my client, by means which have caused my client great mental distress, and have even endangered his very existence.î
Gimbel nodded. If the case only had a precedent somewhereÖ But it hadnít; he remembered grimly the hours heíd spent thumbing through all sorts of unlikely law books, looking for anything that might bear on the case. It had been his better judgment that he throw the case out of court outright-a judge couldnít afford to have himself laughed at, not if he were ambitious. And public laughter was about the only certainty there was to this case. But Wilson had put up such a fight that the judgeís temper had taken over. He never did like Wilson, anyhow.
ìYou may proceed with your witnesses,î he said.
Turnbull nodded. To the clerk he said, ìCall Henry Jenkins to the stand.î
Wilson was on his feet before the clerk opened his mouth.
ìObjection!î he bellowed. ìThe so-called Henry Jenkins cannot qualify as a witness!î
ìWhy not?î demanded Turnbull.
ìBecause heís dead!î
The judge clutched his gavel with one hand, forehead with the other. He banged on the desk to quiet the courtroom.
Turnbull stood there, smiling. ìNaturally,î he said, ìyouíll have proof of that statement.î
Wilson snarled. ìCertainly.î He referred to his brief. ìThe so-called Henry Jenkins is the ghost, spirit or specter of one Hank Jenkins, who prospected for gold in this territory a century ago. He was killed by a bullet through the throat from the gun of one Long Tom Cooper, and was declared legally dead on September 14, 1850. Cooper was hanged for his murder. No matter what hocus-pocus you produce for evidence to the contrary now, that status of legal death remains completely valid.î
ìWhat evidence have you of the identity of my client with this Hank Jenkins?î Turnbull asked grimly.
ìDo you deny it?î
Turnbull shrugged. ìI deny nothing. Iím not being cross-examined. Furthermore, the sole prerequisite of a witness is that he understand the value of an oath. Henry Jenkins was tested by John Quincy Fitzjames, professor of psychology at the University of Southern California. The results-I have Dr. Fitzjamesí sworn statement of them here, which I will introduce as an exhibit-show clearly that my clientís intelligence quotient is well above normal, and that a psychiatric examination discloses no important aberrations which would injure his validity as a witness. I insist that my client be allowed to testify on his own behalf.î
ìBut heís dead!î squawked Wilson. ìHeís invisible right now!î
ìMy client.î said Turnbull stiffly, ìis not present just now. Undoubtedly that accounts for what you term his invisibility.î He paused for the appreciative murmur that swept through the court. Things were breaking perfectly, he thought, smiling. ìI have here another affidavit,î he said. ìIt is signed by Elihu James and Terence MacRae, who respectively head the departments of physics and biology at the same university. It states that my client exhibits all the vital phenomena of life. I am prepared to call all three of my expert witnesses to the stand, if necessary.î
Wilson scowled but said nothing. Judge Gimbel leaned forward. ìI donít see how it is possible for me to refuse the plaintiff the right to testify,î he said. ìIf the three experts who prepared these reports will testify on the stand to the facts contained in them, Henry Jenkins may then take the stand.î
Wilson sat down heavily. The three experts spoke briefly-and dryly. Wilson put them through only the most formal of cross-examinations.
The judge declared a brief recess. In the corridor outside, Wilson and his client lit cigarettes and looked unsympathetically at each other.
ìI feel like a fool,î said Russell Harley. ìBringing suit against a ghost.î
ìThe ghost brought the suit,î Wilson reminded him. ìIf only weíd been able to hold fire for a couple more weeks, till another judge came on the bench, I couldíve got this thing thrown right out of court.î
ìWell, why couldnít we wait?î
ìBecause you were in such a damn hurry!î Wilson said. ìyou and that idiot Nicholls-so confident that it would never come to trial.î
Harley shrugged, and thought unhappily of their failure in completely exorcising the ghost of Hank Jenkins. That had been a mess. Jenkins had somehow escaped from the charmed circle theyíd drawn around him, in which theyíd hoped to keep him till the trial was forfeited by non-appearance.
ìThatís another thing,î said Wilson. ìWhere is Nicholls?î
Harley shrugged again. ìI dunno. The last I saw of him was in your office. He came around to see me right after the deputy slapped the show-cause order on me at the house. He brought me down to you-said youíd been recommended to him. Then you and him and I talked about the case for a while. He went out, after he lent me a little money to help meet your retainer. Havenít seen him since.î
ìIíd like to know who recommended me to him,î Wilson said grimly. ìI donít think heíd ever recommend anybody else. I donít like this case-and I donít much like you.î
Harley growled but said nothing. He flung his cigarette away. It tasted of the garbage that hung around his neck-everything did. Nicholls had told no lies when he said Harley wouldnít much like the bundle of herbs that would ward off the ghost of old Jenkins. They smelled.
The court clerk was in the corridor, bawling something, and people were beginning to trickle back in. Harley and his attorney went with them.
When the trial had been resumed, the clerk said, ìHenry Jenkins!î
Wilson was on his feet at once. He opened the door of the judgeís chamber, said something in a low tone. Then he stepped back, as if to let someone through.
Pat. HISS. Pat. HISS-
There was a concerted gasp from the spectators as the weirdly appearing trickle of blood moved slowly across the open space to the witness chair. This was the ghost-the plaintiff in the most eminently absurd case in the history of jurisprudence.
ìAll right, Hank,î Turnbull whispered. ìYouíll have to materialize long enough to let the clerk swear you in.î
The clerk drew back nervously at the pillar of milky fog that appeared before him, vaguely humanoid in shape. A phantom hand, half transparent, reached out to touch the Bible. The clerkís voice shook as he administered the oath, and heard the response come from the heart of the cloudpillar.
The haze drifted into the witness chair, bent curiously at about hip-height, and popped into nothingness.
The judge banged his gavel wildly. The buzz of alarm that had arisen from the spectators died out.
ìIíll warn you again,î he declared, ìthat unruliness will not be tolerated. The counsel for the plaintiff may proceed.î
Turnbull walked to the witness chair and addressed its emptiness. ì
ìYour name?î
ìMy name is Henry Jenkins.î
ìYour occupation?î
There was a slight pause. ìI have none. I guess youíd say Iím retired.î
ìMr. Jenkins, just what connection have you with the building referred to as Harley Hall?î
ìI have occupied it for ninety years.î
ìDuring this time, did you come to know the late Zebulon Harley, owner of the Hall?î
ìI knew Zeb quite well.î
Turnbull nodded. ìWhen did you make his acquaintance?î he asked.
ìIn the spring of 1907. Zeb had just lost his wife. After that, you see, he made Harley Hall his year-round home. He became-well, more or less of a hermit. Before that we had never met, since he was only seldom at the Hall. But we became friendly then.î
ìHow long did this friendship last?î
ìUntil he died last fall. I was with him when he died. I still have a few keepsakes he left me then.î There was a distinct nostalgic sigh from the witness chair, which by now was liberally spattered with muddy red liquid. The falling drops seemed to hesitate for a second, and their sizzling noise was muted as with a strong emotion.
Turnbull went on, ìYour relations with him were good, then?î
ìIíd call them excellent,î the emptiness replied firmly. ìEvery night we sat up together. When we didnít play pinochle or chess or cribbage, we just sat and talked over the news of the day. I still have the book we used to keep records of the chess and pinochle games. Zeb made the entries himself, in his own handwriting.î
Turnbull abandoned the witness for a moment. He faced the judge with a smile. ìI offer in evidence,î he said, ìthe book mentioned. Also a ring given to the plaintiff by the late Mr. Harley, and a copy of the plays of Gilbert and Sullivan. On the flyleaf of this book is inscribed, ëTo Old Hankí, in Harleyís own hand.î
He turned again to the empty, blood-leaking witness chair.
He said, ìIn all your years of association, did Zebulon Harley ever ask you to leave, or to pay rent?î
ìOf course not. Not Zeb!î
Turnbull nodded. ìVery good,î he said. ìNow, just one or two more questions. Will you tell in your own words what occurred, after the death of Zebulon Harley, that caused you to bring this suit?î
ìWell, in January young Harley-î
ìYou mean Russell Joseph Harley, the defendant?î
ìYes. He arrived at Harley Hall on January fifth. I asked him to leave, which he did. On the next day he returned with another man. They placed a talisman upon the threshold of the main entrance, and soon after sealed every threshold and windowsill in the Hall with a substance which is noxious to me. These activities were accompanied by several of the most deadly spells in the Ars Magicorum. He further added an Exclusion Circle with a radius of a little over a mile, entirely surrounding the Hall.î
ìI see,î the lawyer said. ìWill you explain to the court the effects of these activities?î
ìWell,î the voice said thoughtfully, ìitís a little hard to put in words. I canít pass the Circle without a great expenditure of energy. Even if I did I couldnít enter the building because of the talisman and the seals.î
ìCould you enter by air? Through a chimney, perhaps?î
ìNo. The Exclusion Circle is really a sphere. Iím pretty sure the effort would destroy me.î
ìIn effect, then, you are entirely barred from the house you have occupied for ninety years, due to the wilful acts of Russell Joseph Harley, the defendant, and an unnamed accomplice of his.î
ìThat is correct.î
Turnbull beamed. ìThank you. Thatís all.î
He turned to Wilson, whose face had been a study in dourness throughout the entire examination. ìYour witness,î he said.
Wilson snapped to his feet and strode to the witness chair.
He said belligerently, ìYou say your name is Henry Jenkins?î
ìYes.î
ìThat is your name now, you mean to say. What was your name before?î
ìBefore?î There was surprise in the voice that emanated from above the trickling blood-drops. ìBefore when?î
Wilson scowled. ìDonít pretend ignorance,î he said sharply. ìBefore you died, of course.î
ìObjection!î Turnbull was on his feet, glaring at Wilson. ìThe counsel for the defense has no right to speak of some hypothetical death of my client!î
Gimbel raised a hand wearily and cut off the words that were forming on Wilsonís lips. ìObjection sustained,î he said. ìNo evidence has been presented to identify the plaintiff as the prospector who was killed in 1850-or anyone else.î
Wilsonís mouth twisted into a sour grimace. He continued on a lower key.
ìYou say, Mr. Jenkins, that you occupied Harley Hall for ninety years.î
ìNinety-two years next month. The Hall wasnít built-in its present form, anyhow-until 1876, but I occupied the house that stood on the site previously.î
ìWhat did you do before then?î
ìBefore then?î The voice paused, then said doubtfully, ìI donít remember.î
ìYouíre under oath!î Wilson flared.
The voice got firmer. ìNinety years is a long time,î it said. ìI donít remember.î
ìLetís see if I canít refresh your memory. Is it true that ninety-one years ago, in the very year in which you claim to have begun your occupancy of Harley Hall, Hank Jenkins was killed in a gun duel?î
ìThat may be true, if you say so. I donít remember.î
ìDo you remember that the shooting occurred not fifty feet from the present site of Harley Hall?î
ìIt may be.î
ìWell, then,î Wilson thundered, ìis it not a fact that when Hank Jenkins died by violence his ghost assumed existence? That it was then doomed to haunt the site of its slaying throughout eternity?î
The voice said evenly, ìI have no knowledge of that.î
ìDo you deny that it is well known throughout that section that the ghost of Hank Jenkins haunts Harley Hall?î
ìObjection!î shouted Turnbull. ìPopular opinion is not evidence.î
ìObjection sustained. Strike the question from the record.î
Wilson, badgered, lost his control. In a dangerously uneven voice, he said, ìPerjury is a criminal offense. Mr. Jenkins, do you deny that you are the ghost of Hank Jenkins?î
The tone was surprised. ìWhy, certainly.î
ìYou are a ghost, arenít you?î
Stiffly, ìIím an entity on the astral plane.î
ìThat, I believe, is what is called a ghost?î
ìI canít help what itís called. Iíve heard you called a lot of things. Is that proof?î
There was a surge of laughter from the audience. Gimbel slammed his gavel down on the bench.
ìThe witness,î he said, ìwill confine himself to answering questions.î
Wilson bellowed, ìIn spite of what you say, itís true, isnít it, that you are merely the spirit of a human being who had died through violence?î
The voice from above the blood drops retorted, ìI repeat that I am an entity of the astral plane. I am not aware that I was ever a human being.î
The lawyer turned an exasperated face to the bench.
ìYour honor,î he said, ìI ask that you instruct the witness to cease playing verbal hide-and-seek. It is quite evident that the witness is a ghost, and that he is therefore the relict of some human being, ipso facto. Circumstantial evidence is strong that he is the ghost of the Hank Jenkins who was killed in 1850. But this is a non-essential point. What is definite is that he is the ghost of someone who is dead, and hence is unqualified to act as witness! I demand his testimony be stricken from the record!î
Turnbull spoke up at once. ìWill the counsel for the defense quote his authority for branding my client a ghost-in the face of my clientís repeated declaration that he is an entity of the astral plane? What is the legal definition of a ghost?î
Judge Gimbel smiled. ìCounsel for the defense will proceed with the cross-examination,î he said.
Wilsonís face Hushed dark purple. He mopped his brow with a large bandanna, then glared at the dropping, sizzling trickle of blood.
ìWhatever you are,î he said, ìanswer me this question. Can you pass through a wall?î
ìWhy, yes. Certainly.î There was a definite note of surprise in the voice from nowhere. ìBut it isnít as easy as some people think. It definitely requires a lot of effort.î
ìNever mind that. You can do it?î
ìYes.î
ìCould you be bound by any physical means? Would handcuffs hold you? Or ropes, chains, prison walls, a hermetically sealed steel chest?î
Jenkins had no chance to answer. Turnbull, scenting danger, cut in hastily. ìI object to this line of questioning. It is entirely irrelevant. ì
ìOn the contrary,î Wilson cried loudly, ìit bears strongly on the qualifications of the so-called Henry Jenkins as a witness! I demand that he answer the question.î
Judge Gimbel said, ìObjection overruled. Witness will answer the question.î
The voice from the chair said superciliously, ìI donít mind answering. Physical barriers mean nothing to me, by and large.î
The counsel for the defense drew himself up triumphantly.
ìVery good,î he said with satisfaction. ìVery good.î Then to the judge, the words coming sharp and fast, ìI claim, your honor, that the so-called Henry Jenkins has no legal status as a witness in court. There is clearly no value in understanding the nature of an oath if a violation of the oath can bring no punishment in its wake. The statements of a man who can perjure himself freely have no worth. I demand they be stricken from the record!î
Turnbull was at the judgeís bench in two strides.
ìI had anticipated that, your honor,î he said quickly. ìFrom the very nature of the case, however, it is clear that my client can be very definitely restricted in his movements-spells, pentagrams, talismans, amulets, Exclusion Circles and what-not. I have here-which I am prepared to deliver to the bailiff of the court-a list of the various methods of confining an astral entity to a restricted area for periods ranging from a few moments to all eternity. Moreover, I have also signed a bond for five thousand dollars, prior to the beginning of the trial, which I stand ready to forfeit should my client be confined and make his escape, if found guilty of any misfeasance as a witness.î
Gimbelís face, which had looked startled for a second, slowly cleared. He nodded. ìThe court is satisfied with the statement of the counsel for the plaintiff,î he declared. ìThere seems no doubt that the plaintiff can be penalized for any misstatements, and the motion of the defense is denied.î
Wilson looked choleric, but shrugged. ì All right,î he said. ìThat will be all:í
ìYou may step down, Mr. Jenkins,î Gimbel directed, and watched in fascination as the blood-dripping column rose and floated over the floor, along the corridor, out the door.
Turnbull approached the judgeís bench again. He said, ìI would like to place in evidence these notes, the diary of the late Zebulon Harley. Itwas presented to my client by Harley himself last fall. I call particular attention to the entry for April sixth, nineteen seventeen, in which he mentions the entrance of the United States into the First World War, and records the results of a series of eleven pinochle games played with a personage identified as ëOld Hank.í With the courtís permission, I will read the entry for that day, and also various other entries for the next four years. Please note the references to someone known variously as ëJenkinsí, ëHank Jenkinsí and-in one extremely significant passage-íOld Invisible: ì
Wilson stewed silently during the slow reading of Harleyís diary. There was anger on his face, but he paid close attention, and when the reading was over he leaped to his feet.
ìI would like to know,î he asked, ìif the counsel for the plaintiff is in possession of any diaries after nineteen twenty?î
Turnbull shook his head. ìHarley apparently never kept a diary, except during the four years represented in this.î
ìThen I demand that the court refuse to admit this diary as evidence on two counts,î Wilson said. He raised two fingers to tick off the points. ìIn the first place, the evidence presented is frivolous. The few vague and unsatisfactory references to Jenkins nowhere specifically describe him as what he is-ghost, astral entity or what you will. Second, the evidence, even were the first point overlooked, concerns only the years up to nineteen twenty-one. The case concerns itself only with the supposed occupation of Harley Hall by the so-called Jenkins in the last twenty years- since ëtwenty-one. Clearly, the evidence is therefore irrelevant.î
Gimbel looked at Turnbull, who smiled calmly.
ìThe reference to ëOld Invisibleí is far from vague,î he said. ìIt is a definite indication of the astral character of my client. Furthermore, evidence as to the friendship of my client with the late Mr. Zebulon Harley before nineteen twenty-one is entirely relevant, as such a friendship, once established, would naturally be presumed to have continued indefinitely. Unless of course, the defense is able to present evidence to the contrary.î
Judge Gimbel said, ìThe diary is admitted as evidence.î
Turnbull said, ìI rest my case.î
There was a buzz of conversation in the courtroom while the judge looked over the diary, and then handed it to the clerk to be marked and entered.
Gimbel said, ìThe defense may open its case.î
Wilson rose. To the clerk he said, ìRussell Joseph Harley.î
But young Harley was recalcitrant. ìNix, ì he said, on his feet, pointing at the witness chair. ìThat thingís got blood all over it! You donít expect me to sit down in that large puddle of blood, do you?î
Judge Gimbel leaned over to look at the chair. The drip-drop trickle of blood from the apparition whoíd been testifying had left its mark. Muddy brown all down the front of the chair. Gimbel found himself wondering how the ghost managed to replenish its supply of the fluid, but gave it up.
ìI see your point,î he said. ëWell, itís getting a bit late anyhow. The clerk will take away the present witness chair and replace it. In the interim, I declare the court recessed till tomorrow morning at ten oíclock.î








III


Russell Harley noticed how the elevator boyís back registered repulsion and disapproval, and scowled. He was not a popular guest in the hotel, he knew well. Where he made his mistake, though, was in thinking that the noxious bundle of herbs about his neck was the cause of it. His odious personality had a lot to do with the chilly attitude of the management and his fellow guests.
He made his way to the bar, ignoring the heads that turned in surprise to follow the reeking comet-tail of his passage. He entered the red-leather-and-chromium drinking room, and stared about for Lawyer Wilson.
And blinked in surprise when he saw him. Wilson wasnít alone. In the booth with him was a tall, dark figure, with his back to Harley. The back alone was plenty for recognition. Nicholls!
Wilson had seen him. ìHello, Harley,î he said, all smiles and affability in the presence of the man with the money. ìCome on and sit down. Mr. Nicholls dropped in on me a little while ago, so I brought him over.î
ìHello,î Harley said glumly, and Nicholls nodded. The muscles of his cheeks pulsed, and he seemed under a strain, strangely uncomfortable in Harleyís presence. Still there was a twinkle in the look he gave young Harley, and his voice was friendly enough-though supercilious-as he said:
ìHello, Harley. How is the trial going?î
ìAsk him,î said Harley, pointing a thumb at Wilson as he slid his knees under the boothís table and sat down. ìHeís the lawyer. Heís supposed to know these things.î
ìDoesnít he?î
Harley shrugged and craned his neck for the waitress. ìOh, I guess soÖRye and water!î He watched the girl appreciatively as she nodded and went off to the bar, then turned his attention back to Nicholls. ìThe trouble is,î he said, ìWilson may think he knows, but I think heís all wet:í
Wilson frowned. ìDo you imply-î he began, but Nicholls put up a hand.
ìLetís not bicker,î said Nicholls. ìSuppose you answer my question. I have a stake in this, and I want to know. Howís the trial going?î
Wilson put on his most open-faced expression. ìFrankly,î he said, ìnot too well. Iím afraid the judge is on the other side. If youíd listened to me and stalled till another judge came along-î
ìI had no time to stall, ì said Nicholls. ìI have to be elsewhere within a few days. Even now, I should be on my way. Do you think we might lose the case?î
Harley laughed sharply. As Wilson glared at him he took his drink from the waitressí tray and swallowed it. The smile remained on his face as he listened to Wilson say smoothly:
ìThere is a good deal of danger, yes.î
ìHum.î Nicholls looked interestedly at his fingernails. ìPerhaps I chose the wrong lawyer.î
ìSure you did.î Harley waved at the waitress, ordered another drink. ìYou want to know what else I think? I think you picked the wrong client, spelled s-t-o-o-g-e. Iím getting sick of this. This damn thing around my neck smells bad. How do I know itís any good, anyhow? Far as I can see, it just smells bad, and thatís all.î
ìIt works,î Nicholls said succinctly. ìI wouldnít advise you to go without it. The late Hank Jenkins is not a very strong ghost-a strong one would tear you apart and chew up your herbs for dessert but without the protection of what you wear about your neck, you would become a very uncomfortable human as soon as Jenkins heard youíd stopped wearing it.î
He put down the glass of red wine heíd been inhaling without drinking, looked intently at Wilson. ìIíve put up the money in this,î he said. ìI had hoped youíd be able to handle the legal end. I see Iíll have to do more. Now listen intently, because I have no intention of repeating this. Thereís an angle to this case thatís got right by your blunted legal acumen. Jenkins claims to be an astral entity, which he undoubtedly is. Now, instead of trying to prove him a ghost, and legally dead, and therefore unfit to testify, which you have been doing, suppose you do thisÖî
He went on to speak rapidly and to the point.
And when he left them a bit later, and Wilson took Harley up to his room and poured him into bed, the lawyer felt happy for the first time in days.
Russell Joseph Harley, a little hung over and a lot nervous, was called to the stand as first witness in his own behalf.
Wilson said, ìYour name?î
ìRussell Joseph Harley.î
ìYou are the nephew of the late Zebulon Harley, who bequeathed the residence known as Harley Hall to you?î
ìYes.î
Wilson turned to the bench. ìI offer this copy of the late Mr. Zebulon Harleyís will in evidence. All his possessions are left to his nephew and only living kin, the defendant.î
Turnbull spoke from his desk. ìThe plaintiff in no way disputes the defendantís equity in Harley Hall.î
Wilson continued, ìYou passed part of your childhood in Harley Hall, did you not, and visited it as a grown man on occasion?î
ìYes.î
ìAt any time, has anything in the shape of a ghost, specter or astral entity manifested itself to you in Harley Hall?î
ìNo. Iíd remember it.î
ìDid your late uncle ever mention any such manifestation to you?î
ìHim? No.î
ìThatís all.î
Turnbull came up for the cross-examination.
ìWhen, Mr. Harley, did you last see your uncle before his death?î
ìIt was in nineteen thirty-eight. In September, some time-around the tenth or eleventh of the month.î
ìHow long a time did you spend with him?,í
Harley flushed unaccountably. ìAh-just one day,î he said.
ìWhen before that did you see him?,í
ìWell, not since I was quite young. My parents moved to Pennsylvania in nineteen twentyÖ
ìAnd since then-except for that one-day visit in nineteen thirty-eight-has any communication passed between your uncle and yourself?î
ìëNo, I guess not. He was a rather queer duck-solitary. A little bit balmy, I think.î
ìëWell, youíre a loving nephew. But in view of what youíve just said, does it sound surprising that your uncle never told you of Mr. Jenkins? He never had much chance to, did he?î
ìHe had a chance in nineteen thirty-eight, but he didnít,î Harley said defiantly.
Turnbull shrugged. ìIím finished, ì he said.
Gimbel began to look bored. He had anticipated something more in the way of fireworks. He said, ìHas the defense any further witnesses?î
Wilson smiled grimly. ìYes, your honor,Ö he said. This was his big moment, and he smiled again as he said gently, ìI would like to call Mr. Henry Jenkins to the stand.î
In the amazed silence that followed, Judge Gimbel leaned forward. ìëYou mean you wish to call the plaintiff as a witness for the defense?î
Serenely, ìYes, your honor.î
Gimbel grimaced. ìCall Henry Jenkins,î he said wearily to the clerk, and sank back in his chair.
Turnbull was looking alarmed. He bit his lip, trying to decide whether to object to this astonishing procedure, but finally shrugged as the clerk bawled out the ghostís name.
Turnbull sped do\VD the corridor, out the door. His voice was heard in the anteroom, then he returned more slowly. Behind him came the trickle of blood drops: Pat. HISS. Pat. HISS-
ìOne moment, ì said Gimbel, coming to life again. ìI have no objection to your testifying, Mr. Jenkins, but the State should not be subjected to the needless expense of reupholstering its witness chair every time you do. Bailiff, find some sort of a rug or something to throw over the chair before Mr. Jenkins is sworn in:í
A tarpaulin was hurriedly procured and adjusted to the chair; Jenkins materialized long enough to be sworn in, then sat.
ìTell me, Mr. Jenkins,î he said, ìjust how many ëastral entitiesí-I believe that is what you call yourself-are there?î
ìI have no way of knowing. Many billions.î
ìAs many, in other words, as there have been human beings to die by violence?î
Turnbull rose to his feet in sudden agitation, but the ghost neatly evaded the trap. ìI donít know. I only know there are billions.î
The lawyerís cat-who-ate-canary smile remained undimmed. ìAnd all these billions are constantly about us, everywhere, only remaining invisible. Is that it?î
ìOh, no. Very few remain on Earth. Of those, still fewer have anything to do with humans. Most humans are quite boring to us.î
ìWell, how many would you say are on Earth? A hundred thousand?î
ìEven more, maybe. But thatís a good guess.î
Turnbull interrupted suddenly. ìI would like to know the significance of these questions. I object to this whole line of questioning as being totally irrelevant.î
Wilson was a study in legal dignity. He retorted, ìI am trying to elicit some facts of major value, your honor. This may change the entire character of the case. I ask your patience for a moment or two.î
ìCounsel for the defense may continue,î Gimbel said curtly. Wilson showed his canines in a grin. He continued to the blood dripping before him. ìNow, the contention of your counsel is that the late Mr. Harley allowed an ëastral entityí to occupy his home for twenty years or more, with his full knowledge and consent. That strikes me as being entirely improbable, but shall we for the moment assume it to be the case?î
ìCertainly! Itís the truth.î
ìThen tell me, Mr. Jenkins, have you fingers?î
ìHave I-what?î
ìYou heard me!î Wilson snapped. ìHave you fingers, flesh-and-blood fingers, capable of making an imprint?î
ìWhy, no. I-î Wilson rushed on. ìOr have you a photograph of yourself-or specimens of your handwriting-or any sort of material identification? Have you any of these?î
The voice was definitely querulous. ìWhat do you mean?î
Wilsonís voice became harsh, menacing. ìI mean, can you prove that you are the astral entity alleged to have occupied Zebulon Harleyís home. Was it you-or was it another of the featureless, faceless, intangible unknowns-one of the hundreds of thousands of them that, by your own admission, are all over the face of the earth, rambling where they choose, not halted by any locks or bars? Can you prove that you are anyone in particular?î
ìYour honor!î Turnbullís voice was almost a shriek as he found his feet at last. ìMy clientís identity was never in question!î
ìIt is now!î roared Wilson. ìThe opposing counsel has presented a personage whom he styles ëHenry Jenkins: Who is this Jenkins? What is he? Is he even an individual-or a corporate aggregation of these mysterious ëastral entitiesí which we are to believe are everywhere, but which we never see? If he is an individual, is he the individual? And how can we know that, even if he says he is? Let him produce evidence-photographs, a birth certificate, fingerprints. Let him bring in identifying witnesses who have known both ghosts, and are prepared to swear that these ghosts are the same ghost. Failing this, there is no case! Your honor, I demand the court declare an immediate judgment in favor of the defendant!î
Judge Gimbel stared at Turnbull. ìHave you anything to say?î he asked. ìThe argument of the defense would seem to have every merit with it. Unless you can produce some sort of evidence as to the identity of your client, I have no alternative but to find for the defense.î
For a moment there was a silent tableau. Wilson triumphant, Turnbull furiously frustrated.
How could you identify a ghost?
And then came the quietly amused voice from the witness chair.
ìThis thing has gone far enough, ì it said above the sizzle and splatter of its own leaking blood. ìI believe I can present proof that will satisfy the court.î
Wilsonís face fell with express-elevator speed. Turnbull held his breath, afraid to hope.
Judge Gimbel said, ìYou are under oath. Proceed.î
There was no other sound in the courtroom as the voice said, ìMr. Harley, here, spoke of a visit to his uncle in nineteen thirty-eight. I can vouch for that. They spent a night and a day together. They werenít alone. I was there.î
No one was watching Russell Harley, or they might have seen the sudden sick pallor that passed over his face.
The voice, relentless, went on. ìPerhaps I shouldnít have eavesdropped as I did, but old Zeb never had any secrets from me anyhow. I listened to what they talked about. Young Harley was working for a bank in Philadelphia at the time. His first big job. He needed money, and needed it bad. There was a shortage in his department. A woman named Sally-î
ìHold on!î Wilson yelled. ìThis has nothing to do with your identification of yourself. Keep to the point!î
But Turnbull had begun to comprehend. He was shouting, too, almost too excited to be coherent. ìYour honor, my client must be allowed to speak. If he shows knowledge of an intimate conversation between the late Mr. Harley and the defendant, it would be certain proof that he enjoyed the late Mr. Harleyís confidence, and thus, Q.E.D., that he is no other than the astral entity who occupied Harley Hall for so long!î
Gimbel nodded sharply. ìLet me remind counsel for the defense that this is his own witness. Mr. Jenkins, continue.î
The voice began again, ìAs I was saying, the womanís name-î
ìShut up, damn you!î Harley yelled. He sprang upright. turned beseechingly toward the judge. ìHeís twisting it! Make him stop! Sure, I knew my uncle had a ghost. Heís it. all right, curse his black soul! He can have the house if he wants it-Iíll clear out. Iíll clear out of the whole damned state!î
He broke off into babbling and turned about wildly. Only the intervention of a marshal kept him from hurtling out of the courtroom.
Banging of the gavel and hard work by the court clerk and his staff restored order in the courtroom. When the room had returned almost to normalcy, Judge Gimbel, perspiring and annoyed, said, ì As far as I am concerned, identification of the witness is complete. Has the defense any further evidence to present?î
Wilson shrugged morosely. ìNo, your honor.î
ìCounsel for the plaintiff?î
ìNothing, your honor. I rest my case.î Gimbel plowed a hand through his sparse hair and blinked. ìIn that case,î he said, ìI find for the plaintiff. An order is entered hereby that the defendant. Russell Joseph Harley, shall remove from the premises of Harley Hall all spells, pentagrams, talismans and other means of exorcism employed; that he shall cease and desist from making any attempts, of whatever nature, to evict the tenant in the future; and that Henry Jenkins, the plaintiff, shall be permitted to full use and occupancy of the premises designated as Harley Hall for the full term of his natural-ah-existence.î
The gavel banged. ìThe case is closed.î
ìDonít take it so hard,î said a mild voice behind Russell Harley. He whirled surlily. Nicholls was coming up the street after him from the courthouse, Wilson in tow.
Nicholls said, ìYou lost the case, but youíve still got your life. Let me buy you a drink. In here, perhaps.î
He herded them into a cocktail lounge, sat them down before they had a chance to object. He glanced at his expensive wrist watch. ìI have a few minutes,î he said ìThen I really must be off. Itís urgent.î
He hailed a barman, ordered for all. Then he looked at young Harley and smiled broadly as he dropped a bill on the counter to pay for the drinks.
ìHarley,î he said, ìI have a motto that you would do well to remember at times like these. Iíll make you a present of it, if you like.î
ìWhat is it?î
ìëThe worst is yet to come.í ì
Harley snarled and swallowed his drink without replying. Wilson said, ìWhat gets me is, why didnít they come to us before the trial with that stuff about this charmingly illicit client you wished on me? Weíd have had to settle out of court.î
Nicholls shrugged. ìThey had their reasons,î he said ì After all, one case of exorcism, more or less, doesnít matter. But lawsuits set precedents. Youíre a lawyer, of sorts, Wilson; do you see what I mean?î
ìPrecedents?î Wilson looked at him slack-jawed for a moment; then his eyes widened
ìI see you understand me.î Nicholls nodded. ìFrom now on in this state-and by virtue of the full-faith-and-credence clause of the Constitution, in every state of the country-a ghost has a legal right to haunt a house!î
ìGood lord!î said Wilson. He began to laugh, not loud, but from the bottom of his chest.
Harley stared at Nicholls. ìOnce and for all,î he whispered, ìtell me -whatís your angle on all this?î
Nicholls smiled again.
ìThink about it a while,î he said lightly. ìYouíll begin to understand.î He sniffed his wine once more, then sat the glass down gently
And vanished.



***



As Iíve mentioned before, I was never a reader of Weird Tales, and its type of fiction did not captivate me. In 1950, though, when ìLegal Ritesî finally appeared, Weird Tales was nearing the end of its thirty-year road and Iím rather glad I made its pages at least once before its end, even if only as half of a collaboration. It was the longest story in the issue and it received the cover.
ìLegal Ritesî and ìThe Little Man on the Subwayî are the only pieces of fiction I ever wrote in collaboration, and I didnít really enjoy the process. Later on in my career, I had occasion to collaborate on four or five non-fiction books and never really enjoyed that either, nor were any of the collaborations successful Iím essentially a loner and like to take full responsibility for what I write.
In the case of ìLegal Ritesî it seems to me that the beginning is mostly Pohlís rewriting; the trial scene is mostly mine; the ending-I donít remember.
Fantasy was not the only type of story I kept bullheadedly trying, over and over, without much success. Another type was the broadly farcical. I never sold either type to Campbell, but I at least sold the latter elsewhere.
Even while I was writing ìLegal Rites,î I was working on another robot story, but a humorous one-or what I considered humor. I called it ìSource of Powerî and at least knew better than to waste time trying it on Campbell. I sent it directly to Thrilling Wonder, and when it was rejected there, I tried Amazing.
Amazingbought it on October 8, 1941-my first sale to that magazine since those exciting beginning days of the fall of 1938. When it appeared on the stands (two days after Pearl Harbor) in the February 1942. issue, I found that Amazing had retitled it ìRobot AL-76 Goes Astray.î
Although ìRobot AL-76 Goes Astrayî was a ìpositronic robotî story, it didnít really fit in with the other three I had thus far written. When I, Robot, my first collection of ìpositronic robotî stories, was put together, in 1950, I did not include ìRobot AL-76 Goes Astrayî in that volume. When, however, in 1964, The Rest of the Robots was put together, I felt honor-bound by the title, if nothing else, to include all the remaining robot stories published till then, and therefore ìRobot AL-76 Goes Astrayî was included.
August 1, 1941 (ìRobot AL-76 Goes Astrayî was then still working its slow way through the typewriter, because the Nazi invasion of the Soviet Union distracted me) was another important day in my writing career. I went to see John Campbell that day and, not liking to come to him without an idea, I thought hard on the subway ride there.
The fate of ìPilgrimageî (soon to become ìBlack Friar of the Flameî) was still rankling, and I wanted to write another future-historical. I therefore suggested to him that I do a short story against the background of the slow fall of the Galactic Empire (something I intended to model quite frankly on the fall of the Roman Empire).
Campbell caught fire. We spent two hours together, and by the time it was over it was not going to be a short story at all, but an indefinitely long series of stories dealing with the fall of the First Galactic Empire and the rise of the Second.
I submitted the first story of the series, ìFoundation,î to Campbell on September 8, 1941, and it was accepted on the fifteenth. It appeared in the May 1942 issue of Astounding.
Over the next eight years I was to write seven more stories of what came to be called the ìFoundationî series, and these were finally collected into three volumes, Foundation, Foundation and Empire, and Second Foundation, which collectively were called The Foundation Trilogy.
Of all my science fiction, these books were most successful. First published in 1951, 1952, and 1953, respectively, they have been in print constantly as hard-covers ever since, despite the appearance of numerous soft-cover editions. And in 1966, at the 24th World Science Fiction Convention, in Cleveland, the ìFoundationî series received a Hugo (science fictionís equivalent of the Oscar) as the ìBest All-Time Series.î
After ìFoundationî I was ready to try a serious positronic robot story for the first time in half a year. This one, ìRunaround, ì was submitted to Campbell on October 20, 1941, and he accepted it on the twenty-third. It appeared in the March 1942 issue of Astounding and was eventually included in I, Robot.
I then had to get to work at once on a sequel to ìFoundation.î ìFoundationî had been brought to an inconclusive ending on the assumption that a sequel would be forthcoming, and I had to come through. On November 17, the sequel, ìBridle and Saddle,î which was the second story of the ìFoundationî series, was submitted to Campbell, and he accepted it the same day-a record in speed. Whatís more, it was the longest story I had yet written-eighteen thousand words-and even though I received no bonus, the check, for $180, was the largest single check I had yet received. ìBridle and Saddleî was eventually included in Foundation.
Now, at last, I had a series of long stories going, together with my ìpositronic robotî series of short stories. I was feeling quite good.
On November 17, 1941, the day I submitted and sold ìBridle and Saddle,î Campbell told me his plan for starting a new department in Astounding, one to be called ìProbability Zero.î This was to be a department of short-shorts, five hundred to one thousand words, which were to be in the nature of plausible and entertaining Munchausen-like lies. Campbellís notion was that, aside from the entertainment value of these things, they would offer a place where beginners could penetrate the market without having to compete quite so hard with established writers. It would form a stairway to professional status.
This was a good idea in theory and even worked a little. Ray Bradbury, later to be one of the best-known and successful of all science fiction writers, broke into the field with a ìProbability Zeroî item in the July 1942 Astounding. Hal Clement and George 0. Smith also published in ìProbability Zeroî near the very start of their careers.
Unfortunately, it didnít work enough. Campbell had to start the department going with professionals, hoping to let the amateurs carry on once they saw what it was Campbell wanted. There were, however, never enough amateurs who could meet Campbellís standards even for short-shorts of an undemanding nature, and after twelve appearances of ìProbability Zeroî over a space of two and a half years, Campbell gave up.
On November 17, however, he was just beginning, and he wanted me to do a ìProbability Zeroî for him. I was delighted that he considered me to be at that stage of virtuosity where he could order me to do something for him according to measure. I promptly sat down and wrote a short-short called ìBig Game.î On November 24, 1941, I showed it to Campbell. He glanced over it and, rather to my astonishment, handed it back. It wasnít what he wanted.
I wish I could remember what ìBig Gameî was about, for I thought enough of it to try submitting it to Collierís magazine (an over-awing slick) in 1944-and it was, of course, rejected. The title, however, recalls nothing to my mind, and the story now no longer exists.
I tried a second time and did a humorous little positronic robot story called ìFirst Law.î I showed it to Campbell on December 1, and he didnít like that, either. This time, though, I kept the story. Thank goodness, I had finally learned that stories must be carefully saved for eternity, however many times they are rejected, and however firmly you imagine they are retired. ìBig Gameî was the eleventh of my stories to disappear, but it was also the last.
In the case of ìFirst Lawî there came a time when a magazine that did not exist in 1941 was to ask me for something. The magazine in question was Fantastic Universe, whose editor, Hans Stefan Santesson, asked me for a story at rates that would have been fine in 1941 but that by the mid-1950s I was reluctant to accept. I remembered ìFirst Law,î however, and sent it in. Santesson took it and ran it in the October 1956 issue of Fantastic Universe, and, eventually, I included it in The Rest of the Robots.
But back to ìProbability Zeroî-
I tried a third time with a short-story called ìTime Pussy,î which I wrote on the morning of Sunday, December 7, 1941, finishing it just before the radio went crazy with the news of Pearl Harbor. I brought it in to Campbell the next day (life goes on!), and this time he took it, but ìnot too enthusiastically,î according to my diary.










Time Pussy


This was told me long ago by old Mac, who lived in a shack just over the hill from my old house. He had been a mining prospector out in the Asteroids during the Rush of ë37, and spent most of his time now in feeding his seven cats.
ìWhat makes you like cats So much, Mr. Mac?î I asked him.
The old miner looked at me and scratched his chin. ìWell,î he said, ìthey reminds me oí my leetle pets on Pallas. They was something like cats-same kind of head, sort oí-and the cleverest leetle fellers yí ever saw. All dead!î
I felt sorry and said so. Mac heaved a sigh. ìCleverest leetle fellers,î he repeated. ìThey was four-dimensional pussies.î
ìFour-dimensional, Mr. Mac? But the fourth dimension is time.î I had learned that the year before, in the third grade.
ìSo youíve had a leetle schooling, hey?î He took out his pipe and filled it slowly. ìSure, the fourth dimension is time. These pussies was about a foot long and six inches high and four inches wide and stretched somewheres into middle oí next week. Thatís four dimensions, ainít it? Why, if you petted their heads, they wouldnít wag their tails till next day, mebbe. Some 0 the big ones wouldnít wag till day after. Fact!î
I looked dubious, but didnít say anything.
Mac went on: ìThey was the best leetle watchdogs in all creation, too. They had to be. Why, if they spotted a burglar or any suspicious character, theyíd shriek like a banshee. And when one saw a burglar today, heíd shriek yesterday, so we had twenty-four hoursí notice every time.î
My mouth opened. ìHonest?î
ìCross my heart! Yí want to know how we used to feed them? Weí d wait for them to go to sleep, see, and then weíd know they was busy digesting their meals. These leetle time pussies, they always digested their meals exactly three hours before they ate it, on account their stomachs stretched that far back in time. So when they went to sleep, we used to look at the time, get their dinner ready and feed it to them exactly three hours later.î
He had lit his pipe now and was puffing away. He shook his head sadly. ìOnce, though, I made a mistake. Poor leetle time pussy. His name was Joe, and he was just about my favorite, too. He went to sleep one morning at nine and somehow I got the idea it was eight. Naturally, I brought him his feed at eleven. I looked allover for him, but I couldnít find him.î
ìWhat had happened, Mr. Mac?î
ìWell, no time pussyís insides could be expected to handle his breakfast only two hours after digesting it. Its too much to expect. I found him finally under the tool kit in the outer shed. He had crawled there and died of indigestion an hour before. Poor leetle feller! After that, I always set an alarm, so I never made that mistake again.î
There was a short, mournful silence after that, and I resumed in a respectful whisper: ìYou said they all died, before. Were they all killed like that?î
Mac shook his head solemnly. ìNo! They used to catch colds from us fellers and just die anywhere from a week to ten days before they caught them. They wasnít too many to start with, and a year after the miners hit Pallas they wasnít but about ten left and them ten sort oí weak and sickly. The trouble was, leetle feller, that when they died, they went all to pieces; just rotted away fast. Especially the little four-dimensional jigger they had in their brains which made them act the way they did. It cost us all millions oí dollars.î
ìHow was that, Mr. Mac?î
ìYí see, some scientists back on Earth got wind of our leetle time pussies, and they knew theyíd all be dead before they could get out there next conjunction. So they offered us all a million dollars for each time pussy we preserved for them.î
ìAnd did you?î
ìWell, we tried, but they wouldnít keep. After they died, they were just no good any more, and we had to bury them. We tried packing them in ice, but that only kept the outside all right. The inside was a nasty mess, and it was the inside the scientists wanted.
ìNaturílly, with each dead time pussy costing us a million dollars, we didnít want that to happen. One of us figured out that if we put a time pussy into hot water when it was about to die, the water would soak all through it. Then, after it died, we could freeze the water so it would just be one solid chunk oí ice, and then it would keep.î
My lower jaw was sagging. ìDid it work?î
ìWe tried and we tried, son, but we just couldnít freeze the water fast enough. By the time we had it all iced, the four-dimensional jigger in the time pussyís brain had just corrupted away. We froze the water faster and faster but it was no go. Finally, we had only one time pussy left, and he was just fixing to die, too. We was desperate-and then one of the fellers thought oí something. He figured out a complicated contraption that would freeze all the water just like that -in a split second.
ìWe picked up the last leetle feller and put him into the hot water and hooked on the machine. The leetle feller gave us a last look and made a funny leetle sound and died. We pressed the button and iced the whole thing into a solid block in about a quarter of a second.î Here Mac heaved a sigh that must have weighed a ton. ìBut it was no use. The time pussy spoiled inside 0í fifteen minutes and we lost the last million dollars.î
I caught my breath. ìBut Mr. Mac, you just said you iced the time pussy in a quarter of a second. It didnít have time to spoil.î
ìThatís just it, leetle feller,î he said heavily. ìWe did it too doggoned fast. The time pussy didnít keep because we froze that hot water so derned fast that the ice was still warm!î



***



The most unusual thing about this small item is that it was not published under my own name. Campbell wanted one item in that first ìProbability Zeroî to appear to be by a non-professional, just to encourage the newcomers he hoped would try to break in. He had three entries in that first department and the other two were by L. Sprague de Camp and Malcolm Jameson. Both were longer-established and (despite ìNightfallî) more renowned than I. As low man, it was up to me to use a pseudonym and pretend to be a newcomer.
I saw Campbellís point and, just a little sullenly, agreed. I used the name George E. Dale. It is the only time I ever used a pseudonym in the magazines. In later years I used the pseudonym Paul French on a series of six teen-age science fiction novels for reasons that are another story altogether. That was a special case, and in 1971 and 1972 those six novels appeared as paperbacks under my own name. Now ìTime Pussyî appears here under my own name, and the record is at last absolutely clean.
There followed a two-month period during which I wrote nothing.
The reasons were twofold. In the first place, Pearl Harbor put the United States in the war the day I wrote ìTime Pussy,î and those first two months after the debacle were too disastrous and heartbreaking to allow much in the way of fiction composing.
If that in itself werenít enough, the time had come to try, once again, the qualifying examinations that would, or would not, grant me permission to do research. I very much felt myself to be dangling over the abyss. A second failure to pass would probably mean an end for me at Columbia. Consequently, during those hours when I wasnít working in my fatherís candy store or hanging over the radio, I had to be studying. There was time for nothing else at all.
Hedging my bets rather desperately, I registered for graduate work at New York University, just in case I did not pass once again. After I took my qualifying examinations, at the end of January 1942, I actually attended a few classes at N.Y.U. while waiting for the results to be announced. -but I wonít keep you in suspense. On Friday, the thirteenth of February, the results were announced. I had passed, this time.
During the interval between the taking of the qualifying examinations and the annunciation, I managed to do ìVictory Unintentional.î This was a positronic robot story that was a sequel to ìNot Final!î which had not been a positronic robot story. obviously I was trying to ride the series notion all I could, in the hope of surer sales.
I submitted it to Campbell on February 9, 1942, and if I thought Campbell would find himself unable to reject a series story, I was roundly disabused. Nor was he so impressed by ìNightfallî and by my ìFoundationî series as to find himself incapable of making the rejection a severe one.
On February 13. the very day of my passing into the sacred list of those permitted to do research toward their Ph.D., my spirits were somewhat dashed when I received ìVictory Unintentional?î back with a cryptic rejection, which consisted of the following, in toto, ìCH3C2CH2CH2SH.î Campbell very well knew that this was the formula for ìbutyl mercaptan, ì which gives the skunk its smell, and I very well knew it, too, and Campbell very well knew I knew.
Oh, well! I managed to sell it anyway, to Super Science Stories under its post-Pohl editor, on March 16, 1942, and it appeared in the August 1942 issue of that magazine. Though I did not include it in I, Robot, I did include it, of necessity, in The Rest of the Robots.
After that, though, there came another dry period, the longest I was ever to experience. Once ìVictory Unintentionalî was finished, fourteen months (I) were to pass before I turned back to the typewriter. It was not the conventional ìwriterís block,î of course, for that I have never experienced. Rather, it was the coming of a vast, triple change in my life.
The first change was the fact that I was now beginning chemical research in earnest under Professor Charles R. Dawson. Research is a full-time job and I still had to work it around, somehow, my duties in my fatherís candy store, so there was bound to be very little time for writing.
Then, as though that werenít enough, a second change took place simultaneously
In January 1942 I joined an organization called ëThe Brooklyn Writersí Club,î which had sent me a postcard of invitation. I took the invitation to be a recognition of my status as a ìwriterî and I couldnít possibly have refused.
The first meeting I attended was on January 19, 1942. It turned out to be rather pleasant. I welcomed the chance to get my mind off the qualifying examinations and the war disasters (though I remember spending part of that first meeting discussing the possibility that New York might be bombed).
Most of the members of the club were no further advanced in the profession than I was; nor were any of them, aside from myself, science fiction writers. The chief activity consisted of reading from our own manuscripts so that criticism from the others might be invited. Since it was quickly discovered that I read ìwith expression, ì I became chief reader, a role I enjoyed(It was to be eight years yet before I discovered that I had a natural Hair for the lecture platform.)
On February 9, 1942, the third meeting I attended, there was present a young man, Joseph Goldberger, whom I had not met before. He was a couple of years older than I was. I did most of the reading that day and Goldberger was sufficiently impressed to suggest, after the meeting had adjourned, that the two of us, with our girls, go out on a double date and get to know each other. Embarrassed, I had to explain that I had no girl. With an expansive gesture, he said he would get one for me.
And so he did. On February 14. 1942 (Valentineís Day and the day after I had passed my qualifying examinations) I met him at the Astor Hotel at 8:30 P.M. With him was his girl friend, and with her was her girl friend, Gertrude Blugerman, who was going to be my blind date. -I fell in love, and when I wasnít thinking of research I was thinking of her.
But there was also a third change, in a way the most drastic-
With war, the job situation suddenly changed: technically trained men of all sorts were in demand.
Robert Heinlein, for instance, was an engineer who had been trained at Annapolis. His health had retired him from active service in the Navy and had kept him retired, but his Annapolis connections made it possible for him to work as a civilian engineer at the Naval Air Experimental Station of the u. S. Navy Yard in Philadelphia. He cast about for other qualified people he might persuade to join him there, particularly among his fellow science fiction writers.
He got L. Sprague de Camp to come to the N.A.E.S., and on March 30, 1942, I received a letter from the navy yard asking if I would consider joining them.
I am rather single-minded and, having labored toward my Ph.D. for a year and a half, I would not ordinarily have considered letting go for anything short of a major force. -but the major force was there. I was in love and I wanted to get married even more than I wanted my degree. It occurred to me that I could suspend work toward my Ph.D. with the full approval of the school, thanks to the war emergency, and that I could also get full permission to resume after the war. And by taking a job and postponing-merely postponing- myresearch, I could get married.
I went down to Philadelphia for an interview on April 10 and apparently met their requirements. I took the job, and on May 14, having left my fatherís candy store at last and (at least as a worker) forever, I moved to Philadelphia. Fortunately, Philadelphia was only an hour and a half from New York by train (in those days, I couldnít drive a car and, even if I could, I wouldnít have been able to get the gasoline because of rationing). I was therefore back in New York every weekend.
By the twenty-fourth of the month I had persuaded Gertrude to agree to marry me, and on July 26 we were married.
During those months it did not bother me that I was doing no writing. I had too much to think of-first the war, then research, then the job, then the marriage.
Besides, in the years up to early 1942, I never thought of my writing as anything but a way to help out with my college tuition. It was fun; it was exciting; and such success as I managed to achieve was deeply satisfying-but it had been done to serve a purpose and that purpose had been served. I had no notion that writing could be my career; that it could ever possibly be my career.
My career was to be chemistry. All the time I was writing and selling stories, I was also slaving away at Columbia. Once I earned my Ph.D., I intended to make my living by doing chemical research for some large industry at some munificent salary such as a hundred dollars a week. (As the son of a candy-store keeper, brought up in the depression, I suffered dizzy spells if I tried to think of more than a hundred dollars a week, so I confined my ambitions to that.)
My Philadelphia job, to be sure, paid me only fifty dollars a week at the beginning, but a young couple could live on that, those days, with taxes very small, with an apartment costing $42.50 a month and dinner for two at a restaurant coming to two dollars (including tip).
It wasnít the height of my dreams, but it was only a temporary war job, after all. Once the war was over, I would go back to my research and get my Ph.D. and a better job. Meanwhile, even a salary of $2,600 a year seemed to make it unnecessary for me to write. By my marriage day, I had written forty-two stories, of which twenty-eight had been sold (and three more were yet to sell).My total bachelor earnings over a space of four years had been $1,788.50 for those twenty-eight stories. This amounted to an average earning of just under $8.60 per week or $64 per story.
I never dreamed at that time that I could ever do much better. I had no intention of ever writing anything but science fiction or fantasy for the pulp magazines, which paid one cent a word at most-a cent and a quarter with bonus.
To make even the feeble fifty dollars a week that my job paid me would make it necessary for me to write and sell some forty stories a year, and, at that time, that didnít seem conceivable to me.
It had been all right to labor at the typewriter to pay my way through school, when I had no other source of income, but for what purpose ought I to be writing now? And with a six-day, fifty-four hour week, and the excitement of a new marriage, who had time?
The very existence of science fiction seemed to fade. I had left my magazine collection in New York; I no longer saw Campbell regularly, or Pohl, or any of my science fiction cronies. I scarcely even read the current magazines as they came out.
I might have let science fiction die altogether, and my writing career with it, except that there were little reminders from the outside world, and little itchings inside me that meant (though I didnít know it at the time) that writing was a great deal more to me than just a handy device to make a little spare cash.
I had hardly begun to work at the N.A.E.S., for instance, when the June 1942 issue of Astounding came out with my story ìBridle and Saddle.î And it made the cover.
It was quite beyond my power to resist the temptation to take a copy to work and show it around. I couldnít help but feel the status I gained as a ìwriter.î Later that summer and fall, three other stories were published: ìVictory Unintentionalî and ìThe Imaginaryî in the post-Pohl Super Science Stories and ìThe Hazingî in Thrilling Wonder Stories. Each kept the science fiction world alive for me.
And although my New York coterie of science fiction editors, writers, and readers were gone, I was left not entirely bereft.
Working with me at the N.A.E.S. were Robert Heinlein and L. Sprague de Camp, and I kept up a close social relationship with both. To be sure, each had quit writing for the duration but they were far more successful writers than I was and I hero-worshipped them. In addition, John D. Clark, who was an ardent science fiction fan and who had written and published a couple of stories in 1937, was living in Philadelphia at the time and we frequently saw one another. All three kept the science fiction atmosphere about me.
It was on January 5, 1943, though, that the real trigger came. On that day I received a letter from Fred Pohl to the effect that he was planning to rewrite ìLegal Ritesî and was going to try to sell it again. That was exciting. He wasnít to succeed in selling the story for six more years, but of course I had no way of telling that. To me it seemed that another sale was in the offing and that I was an as-yet-active writer.
Besides, ìLegal Ritesî was a fantasy and I had never yet satisfied that long-standing desire to write and sell a fantasy to Unknown. Five times I had tried, and five times I had failed.
On January 13, quite suddenly, a week after the letter had come and fourteen months after my last-written story, the urge overwhelmed me. I sat down to write a fantasy called ì Author! Author!î
Quickly I found there was something lacking. It was the first time I had ever tried to write something for Campbell without conferences with him. I missed the inspiration that invariably came through talks with him; I missed his encouragement. In fact, I wasnít sure that I could write at all without him. So the story limped and there were dry spells. I didnít finish the first draft till March 5, and the final version wasnít ready for mailing till April 4. 1943.
It had taken me nearly three months to write the story. To be sure, it was twelve thousand words long, but ìBridle and Saddle,î which was half again as long, had taken me only three weeks.
Perhaps if ì Author! Author!î had been rejected, it might have been a long time before I would have had the courage to try again. Fortunately, that was never put to the test. I mailed the story to Campbell on April 6, 1943 (the first time I ever mailed him a story instead of handing it to him), and on the twelfth the check of acceptance arrived. There was not even a revision requested, and whatís more, Campbell paid me a bonus for the first time since ìNightfall.î I received one and a quarter cents a word, or $150 in all. My sixth try at Unknown had succeeded.
It was the equivalent of three weeksí pay at the N.A.E.S. for something that had taken me, off and on, three months. However, the three monthsí work onî Author! Author!î had been of a totally different kind than the three weeksí work at the N.A.E.S. would have been, and the receipt of the $150 check was infinitely more exciting than picking up a similar check, or even a larger one, earned in the course of a punch-the-time-clock job. (Yes, indeed, I punched a time clock at the N.A.E.S.)
As it happened, though, the happy excitement with which I greeted the sale was premature. I had scaled the heights of Unknown too late, and though I had the money, I didnít have the magazine. Robert Heinlein brought me the sad news on August 2, less than four months after the sale.
 Unknown had been having a difficult time of it. Sales werenít high enough, and after its first two years of operation it had had to switch from monthly to bimonthly issues. Now the war had introduced a paper shortage and Street amp; Smith Publications decided to save what paper it could receive for the more successful Astounding and let Unknown go.
At the time I made my sale, there were only three more issues of Unknown fated to be issued and there was no room in any of them forî Author! Author!î The story remained in the vaults of Street amp; Smith indefinitely; a story sold, but not published; and the $150 check was deprived of most of its fun as a result.
There is, however, a happy ending. Twenty years later, Don Bensen of Pyramid Publications was publishing a paperback anthology of stories from Unknown, he asked me for an introduction. With glad nostalgia I complied, writing it on January 15, 1963, almost twenty years to the day after I had started writing the only story I ever sold to the magazine. In the course of the introduction, I referred to the sad story of my attempts to write for Unknown.
The 1960s were not the 1940s. In 1963, the mere mention of an existing Asimov story that had never been published produced excitement, and Bensen wrote to me within three days, asking to see the story. I dug out the manuscript (I saved them now, you see, even for twenty years) and sent it to him.
He asked permission to include it in a second anthology of Unknown stories (pointing out that it had been accepted by the magazine). I explained he would also need permission from Campbell and the publisher. They very kindly granted the permission, and in January 1964. twenty-one years after it was written, ì Author! Author!î was finally published and I finally-after a fashion, and glancingly-made Unknown.








Author! Author!


It occurred to Graham Dorn, and not for the first time, either, that there was one serious disadvantage in swearing youíll go through fire and water for a girl, however beloved. Sometimes she takes you at your miserable word.
This is one way of saying that he had been waylaid, shanghaied and dragooned by his fiancee into speaking at her maiden auntís Literary Society. Donít laugh! Itís not funny from the speakerís rostrum. Some of the faces you have to look at!
To race through the details, Graham Dorn had been jerked onto a platform and forced upright. He had read a speech on ìThe Place of the Mystery Novel in American Literatureî in an appalled tone. Not even the fact that his own eternally precious June had written it (part of the bribe to get him to speak in the first place) could mask the fact that it was essentially tripe.
And then when he was weltering, figuratively speaking, in his own mental gore, the harpies closed in, for lo, it was time for the informal discussion and assorted feminine gush.
óOh, Mr. Dorn, do you work from inspiration? I mean, do you just sit down and then an idea strikes you-all at once? And you must sit up all night and drink black coffee to keep you awake till you get it down?
óOh, yes. Certainly. (His working hours were two to four in the afternoon every other day, and he drank milk.)
óOh, Mr. Dorn, you must do the most awful research to get all those bizarre murders. About how much must you do before you can write a story?
óAbout six months, usually. (The only reference books he ever used were a six-volume encyclopedia and year-before-lastís World Almanac.)
óOh, Mr. Dom, did you make up your Reginald de Meister from a real character? You must have. Heís oh, so convincing in his every detail.
óHeís modeled after a very dear boyhood chum of mine. (Dom had never known anyone like de Meister. He lived in continual fear of meeting someone like him. He had even a cunningly fashioned ring containing a subtle Oriental poison for use just in case he did. So much for de Meister.)
Somewhere past the knot of women, June Billings sat in her seat and smiled with sickening and proprietary pride.
Graham passed a finger over his throat and went through the pantomime of choking to death as unobtrusively as possible. June smiled, nodded, threw him a delicate kiss, and did nothing.
Graham decided to pass a stern, lonely, woman-less life and to have nothing but villainesses in his stories forever after.
He was answering in monosyllables, alternating yesses and noes. Yes, he did take cocaine on occasion. He found it helped the creative urge. No, he didnít think he could allow Hollywood to take over de Meister. He thought movies werenít true expressions of real Art. Besides, they were just a passing fad. Yes, he would read Miss Crumís manuscripts if she brought them. Only too glad to. Reading amateur manuscripts was such fun, and editors are really such brutes.
And then refreshments were announced, and there was a sudden vacuum. It took a split-second for Grahamís head to clear. The mass of femininity had coalesced into a single specimen. She was four feet ten and about eighty-five pounds in weight. Graham was six-two and two hundred ten worth of brawn. He could probably have handled her without difficulty, especially since both her arms were occupied with a pachyderm of a purse. Still, he felt a little delicate, to say nothing of queasy, about knocking her down. It didnít seem quite the thing to do.
She was advancing, with admiration and fervor disgustingly clear in her eyes, and Graham felt the wall behind him. There was no doorway within armreach on either side.
ìOh, Mr. de Meister-do, do please let me call you Mr. de Meister. Your creation is so real to me, that I canít think of you as simply Graham Dorn. You donít mind, do you?î
ìNo, no, of course not,î gargled Graham, as well as he could through thirty-two teeth simultaneously set on edge. ìI often think of myself as Reginald in my more frivolous moments.î
ìThank you. You can have no idea, dear Mr. de Meister, how I have looked forward to meeting you. I have read all your works, and I think they are wonderful.î
ìIím glad you think so.î He went automatically into the modesty routine. ìReally nothing, you know. Ha, ha, ha! Like to please the readers, but lots of room for improvement. Ha, ha, ha!î
ìBut you really are, you know.î This was said with intense earnestness. ìI mean good, really good. I think it is wonderful to be an author like you. It must be almost like being God.î
Graham stared blankly. ìNot to editors, sister.î
Sister didnít get the whisper. She continued, ìTo be able to create living characters out of nothing; to unfold souls to all the world; to put thoughts into words; to build pictures and create worlds. I have often thought that an author was the most gloriously gifted person in creation. Better an inspired author starving in a garret than a king upon his throne. Donít you think so?î
ìDefinitely,î lied Graham.
ìWhat are the crass material goods of the world to the wonders of weaving emotions and deeds into a little world of its own?î
ìWhat, indeed?î
ìAnd posterity, think of posterity!î
ìYes, yes. I often do.î
She seized his hand. ìThereís only one little request. You might,î she blushed faintly, ìyou might give poor Reginald-if you will allow me to call him that just once-a chance to marry Letitia Reynolds. You make her just a little too cruel to him. Iím sure I weep over it for hours together sometimes. But then he is too, too real to me.î
And from somewhere, a lacy frill of handkerchief made its appearance, and went to her eyes. She removed it, smiled bravely, and scurried away. Graham Dorn inhaled, closed his eyes, and gently collapsed into Juneís arms.
His eyes opened with a jerk. ìYou may consider,î he said severely, ìour engagement frazzled to the breaking point. Only my consideration for your poor, aged parents prevents your being known henceforward as the ex-fiancee of Graham Dom.î
ìDarling, you are so noble.î She massaged his sleeve with her cheek. ìCome, Iíll take you home and bathe your poor wounds.î
ìAll right, but youíll have to carry me. Has your precious, loveable aunt got an axe?î
ìBut why?î
ìFor one thing, she had the gall to introduce me as the brain-father, God help me, of the famous Reginald de Meister.î
ìAnd arenít you?î
ìLetís get out of this creep-joint. And get this. Iím no relative by brain or otherwise, of that character. I disown him. I cast him into the darkness. I spit upon him. I declare him an illegitimate son, a foul degenerate, and the offspring of a hound, and Iíll be damned if he ever pokes his lousy patrician nose into my typewriter again.î
They were in the taxi, and June straightened his tie. ì All right, Sonny, letís see the letter.î
ìWhat letter?î
She held out her hand. ìThe one from the publishers.î
Graham snarled and flipped it out of his jacket pocket. ìIíve thought of inviting myself to his house for tea, the damned flintheart. Heís got a rendezvous with a pinch of strychnine.î
ìYou may rave later. What does he say? Hmm-uh-huh-ídoesnít quite come up to what is expected-feel that de Meister isnít in his usual form-a little revision perhaps towards-feel sure the novel can be adjusted-are returning under separate cover-í ì
She tossed it aside. ìI told you you shouldnít have killed off Sancha Rodriguez. She was what you needed. Youíre getting skimpy on the love interest.î
ìYou write it! Iím through with de Meister. Itís getting so clubwomen call me Mr. de Meister, and my picture is printed in newspapers with the caption Mr. de Meister. I have no individuality. No one ever heard of Graham Dom. Iím always: Dom, Dom, you know, the guy who writes the de Meister stuff, you know.î
June squealed, ìSilly! Youíre jealous of your own detective.î
ìI am not jealous of my own character. Listen! I hate detective stories. I never read them after I got into the two-syllable words. I wrote the first as a clever, trenchant, biting satire. It was to blast the entire false school of mystery writers. Thatís why I invented this de Meister. He was the detective to end all detectives. The Compleat Ass, by Graham Dom.
ìSo the public, along with snakes, vipers, and ungrateful children takes this filth to its bosom. I wrote mystery after mystery trying to convert the publicî
Graham Dom drooped a little at the futility of it all.
ìOh, well.î He smiled wanly, and the great soul rose above adversity. ìDonít you see? Iíve got to write other things. I canít waste my life. But whoís going to read a serious novel by Graham Dorn, now that Iím so thoroughly identified with de Meister?î
ìYou can use a pseudonym.î
ìI will not use a pseudonym. Iím proud of my name.î
ìBut you canít drop de Meister. Be sensible, dear.î
ìAnormal fiancee,î Graham said bitterly, ìwould want her future husband to write something really worthwhile and become a great name in literature.î
ìWell, I do want you to, Graham. But just a little de Meister once in a while to pay the bills that accumulate.î
ìHa!î Graham knocked his hat over his eyes to hide the sufferings of a strong spirit in agony. ìNow you say that I canít reach prominence unless I prostitute my art to that unmentionable. Hereís your place. Get out Iím going home and write a good scorching letter on asbestos to our senile Mr. MacDunlap.î
ìDo exactly as you want to, cookie,î soothed June. ìAnd tomorrow when you feel better, youíll come and cry on my shoulder, and weíll plan a revision of Death on the Third Deck together, shall we?î
ìThe engagement, ì said Graham, loftily, ìis broken. ì
ìYes, dear. Iíll be home tomorrow at eightî
ìThat is of no possible interest to me. Good-bye!î
Publishers and editors are untouchables, of course. Theirs is a heritage of the outstretched hand and the well-toothed smile; the nod of the head and the slap of the back.
But perhaps somewhere, in the privacy of the holes to which authors scurry when the night falls, a private revenge is taken. There, phrases may be uttered where no one can overhear, and letters may be written that need not be mailed, and perhaps a picture of an editor, smiling pensively, is enshrined above the typewriter to act the part of bulls-eye in an occasional game of darts.
Such a picture of MacDunlap, so used, enlightened Graham Domís room. And Graham Dom himself, in his usual writing costume (street-clothes and typewriter), scowled at the fifth sheet of paper in his typewriter. The other four were draped over the edge of the wastebasket, condemned for their milk-and-watery mildness.
He began:
ìDear Sir-î and added slowly and viciously, ìor Madam, as the case may be.î
He typed furiously as the inspiration caught him, disregarding the faint wisp of smoke curling upward from the overheated keys:
ìYou say you donít think much of de Meister in this story. Well, I donít think much of de Meister, period. You can handcuff your slimy carcass to his and jump off the Brooklyn Bridge. And I hope they drain the East River just before you jump.
ìFrom now on, my works will be aimed higher than your scurvy press. And the day will come when I can look back on this period of my career with the loathing that is its just-î
Someone had been tapping Graham on the shoulder during the last paragraph. Graham twitched it angrily and ineffectively at intervals.
Now he stopped, turned around, and addressed the stranger in his room courteously: ìWho the devilish damnation are you? And you can leave without bothering to answer. I wonít think you rude.î
The newcomer smiled graciously. His nod wafted the delicate aroma of some unobtrusive hair-oil toward Graham. His lean, hard-bitten jaw stood out keenly, and he said in a well-modulated voice:
ìDe Meister is the name. Reginald de Meister.î
Graham rocked to his mental foundations and heard them creak.
ìGlub,î he said.
ìPardon?î
Graham recovered. ìI said, ëglub,í a little code word meaning which de Meister.î
ìThe de Meister,î explained de Meister, kindly. ìMy character? My detective?î
De Meister helped himself to a seat, and his finely-chiseled features assumed that air of well-bred boredom so admired in the best circles. He lit a Turkish cigarette, which Graham at once recognized as his detectiveís favorite brand, tapping it slowly and carefully against the back of his hand first, a mannerism equally characteristic.
ìReally, old man,î said de Meister. ìThis is really excruciatiníly funny. I suppose I am your charcter, yíknow, but letís not work on that basis. It would be so devastatiníly awkward.î
ìGlub,î said Graham again, by way of rejoinder.
His mind was feverishly setting up alternatives. He didnít drink, more, at the moment, was the pity, so he wasnít drunk. He had a chrome-steel digestion and he wasnít overheated, so it wasnít a hallucination. He never dreamed, and his imagination-as befitted a paying commodity-was under strict control. And since, like all authors, he was widely considered more than half a screwball, insanity was out of the question.
Which left de Meister simply an impossibility, and Graham felt relieved. Itís a very poor author indeed who hasnít learned the fine art of ignoring impossibilities in writing a book.
He said smoothly, ìI have here a volume of my latest work. Do you mind naming your page and crawling back into it. Iím a busy man and God knows I have enough of you in the tripe I write.î
ìBut Iím here on business, old chap. Iíve got to come to a friendly arrangement with you first. Things are deucedly uncomfortable as they are.î
ìLook, do you know youíre bothering me? Iím not in the habit of talking to mythical characters. As a general thing, I donít pal around with them. Besides which, itís time your mother told you that you really donít exist.î
ìMy dear fellow, I always existed. Existence is such a subjective thing. What a mind thinks exists, does exist. I existed in your mind, for instance, ever since you first thought of me.î
Graham shuddered. ìBut the question is, what are you doing out of my mind? Getting a little narrow for you? Want elbow room?î
ìNot at all. Rather satisfactíry mind in its way, but I achieved a more concrete existence only this afternoon, and so I seize the opportunity to engage you face to face in the aforementioned business conversation. You see, that thin, sentimental lady of your society-î
ìWhat society?î questioned Graham hollowly. It was all awfully clear to him now.
ìThe one at which you made a speech-î de Meister shuddered in his turn-îon the detective novel. She believed in my existence, so naturally, I exist.î
He finished his cigarette and flicked it out with a negligent twist of the wrist.
ìThe logic,î declared Graham, ìis inescapable. Now, what do you want and the answer is no.î
ìDo you realize, old man, that if you stop writing de Meister stories, my existence will become that dull, wraithlike one of all superannuated fictional detectives. Iíd have to gibber through the gray mists of Limbo with Holmes, Lecocq, and Dupin.î
ìA very fascinating thought, I think. A very fitting fate.î
Reginald de Meisterís eyes turned icy, and Graham suddenly remembered the passage on page 123 of The Case of the Broken Ashtray:
His eyes, hitherto lazy and unattentive, hardened into twin pools of blue ice and transfixed the butler, who staggered back, a stifled cry on his lips.
Evidently, de Meister lost none of his characteristics out of the novels he adorned.
Graham staggered back, a stifled cry on his lip.
De Meister said menacingly, ìIt would be better for you if the de Meister mysteries continue. Do you understand?î
Graham recovered and summoned a feeble indignation. ìNow, wait a while. Youíre getting out of hand. Remember: in a way, Iím your father. Thatís right. Your mental father. You canít hand me ultimatums or make threats. It isnít filial. Itís lacking in the proper respect and love.î
ìAnd another thing,î said de Meister, unmoved. ìWeíve got to straighten out this business of Letitia Reynolds. Itís gettiní deucedly boriní, yíknow:í
ìNow youíre getting silly. My love scenes have been widely heralded as miracles of tenderness and sentiment not found in one murder mystery out of a thousand. -Wait, Iíll get you a few reviews. I donít mind your attempts to dictate my actions so much, but Iím damned if youíll criticize my writing.î
ìForget the reviews. Tenderness and all that rot is what I donít want. Iíve been driftiní after the fair lady for five volumes now, and behaviní the most insufferable ass. This has got to stop.î
ìIn what way?î
ìIíve got to marry her in your present story. Either that, or make her a good, respectable mistress. And youíll have to stop making me so damned Victorian and gentlemanly towards ladies. Iím only human, old man.î
ìImpossible!î said Graham, ìand that includes your last remark.î
De Meister grew severe. ìReally, old chap, for an author, you display the most appalliní lack of concern for the well-beiní of a character who has supported you for a good many years.î
Graham choked eloquently. ìSupported me? In other words, you think I couldnít sell real novels, hey? Well, Iíll show you. I wouldnít write another de Meister story for a million dollars. Not even for a fifty percent royalty and all television rights. Howís that?î
De Meister frowned and uttered those words that had been the sound of doom to so many criminals: ìWe shall see, but you are not yet done with me.î
With firmly jutting jaw, he vanished.
Grahamís twisted face straightened out, and slowly-very slowly -he brought his hands up to his cranium and felt carefully.
For the first time in a long and reasonably ribald mental life, he felt that his enemies were right and that a good dry cleaning would not hurt his mind at all.
The things that existed in it!
Graham Dorn shoved the doorbell with his elbow a second time. He distinctly remembered her saying she would be home at eight
The peep-hole shoved open. ìHello!î
ìHello!î
Silence!
Graham said plaintively, ìItís raining outside. Canít I come in to dry?î
ìI donít know. Are we engaged, Mr. Dorn?î
ìIf Iím not,î was the stiff reply, ìthen Iíve been turning down the frenzied advances of a hundred passion-stricken girls-beautiful ones, all of them-for no apparent reason.î
ìYesterday, you said-î
ìAh, but who listens to what I say? Iím just quaint that way. Look, I brought you posies.î He flourished roses before the peep-hole.
June opened the door. ìRoses! How plebeian. Come in, cookie, and sully the sofa. Whoa, whoa, before you move a step, what have you got under the other arm? Not the manuscript of Death on the Third Deck?î
ìCorrect. Not that excrescence of a manuscript This is something differentî
Juneís tone chilled. ìThat isnít your precious novel, is it?î
Graham flung his head up, ìHow did you know about it?î
ìYou slobbered the plot all over me at MacDunlapís silver anniversary party.î
ìI did not I couldnít unless I were drunk.î
ìOh, but you were. Stinking is the term. And on two cocktails too.î
ìWell, if I was drunk, I couldnít have told you the right plotî
ìIs the setting a coal-mine district?î
ì-Uh-yes.î
ìAnd are the people concerned real, earthy, unartificial, down-to-earth characters, speaking and thinking just like you and me? Is it a story of basic economic forces? Are the human characters lifted up and thrown down and whirled around, all at the mercy of the coal mine and mechanized industry of today?î
ì-Uh-yes.î
She nodded her head retrospectively. ìI remember distinctly. First, you got drunk and were sick. Then you got better, and told me the first few chapters. Then I got sick.î
She approached the glowering author. ìGraham.î She leant her golden head upon his shoulder and cooed softly. ìWhy donít you continue with the de Meister stories? You get such pretty checks out of them.î
Graham writhed out of her grasp. ìYou are a mercenary wretch, incapable of understanding an authorís soul. You may consider our engagement broken.î
He sat down hard on the sofa, and folded his arms. ìUnless you will consent to read the script of my novel and give me the usual story analysis.î
ìMay I give you my analysis of Death on the Third Deck first?î
ìNo.î
ìGood! In the first place, your love interest is becoming sickening.î
ìIt is not.î Graham pointed his finger indignantly. ìIt breathes a sweet and sentimental fragrance, as of an older day. Iíve got the review here that says it.î He fumbled in his wallet.
ìOh, bullfeathers. Are you going to start quoting that guy in the Pillsboro (Okla.) Clarion? Heís probably your second cousin. You know that your last two novels were completely below par in royalties. And Third Deck isnít even being sold.î
ìSo much the better-Ow!î He rubbed his head violently. ìWhat did you do that for?î
ìBecause the only place I could hit as hard as I wanted to, without disabling you, was your head. Listen! The public is tired of your corny Letitia Reynolds. Why donít you let her soak her ëgleaming golden crown of hairí in kerosene and get familiar with a match?î
ìBut June, that character is drawn from life. From you!î
ìGraham Dorn! I am not here to listen to insults. The mystery market today is swinging towards action and hot, honest love and youíre still in the sweet, sentimental stickiness of five years ago.î
ìBut thatís Reginald de Meisterís character.î
ìWell, change his character. Listen! You introduce Sancha Rodriguez. Thatís fine. I approve of her. Sheís Mexican, flaming, passionate, sultry, and in love with him. So what do you do? First he behaves the impeccable gentleman, and then you kill her off in the middle of the story.î
ìHmm, I see-You really think it would improve things to have de Meister forget himself. A kiss or so-î
June clenched her lovely teeth and her lovely fists. ìOh, darling, how glad I am love is blind! If it ever peeked one tiny little bit, I couldnít stand it. Look, you squirrelís blue plate special, youíre going to have de Meister and Rodriquez fall in love. Theyíre going to have an affair through the entire book and you can put your horrible Letitia into a nunnery. She probably be happier there from the way you make her sound.î
ìThatís all you know about it, my sweet. It so happens that Reginald de Meister is in love with Letitia Reynolds and wants her, not this Roderiguez person.î
ìAnd what makes you think that?î
ìHe told me so.î
ìWho told you so?î
ìReginald de Meister.î
ìWhat Reginald de Meister?î
ì My Reginald de Meister.î
ìWhat do you mean, your Reginald de Meister?î
ìMy character, Reginald de Meister.î
June got up, indulged in some deep-breathing and then said in a very calm voice, ìLetís start all over.î
She disappeared for a moment and returned with an aspirin. ìyour Reginald de Meister, from your books, told you, in person, he was in love with Letitia Reynolds?î
ìThatís right.î
June swallowed the aspirin.
ìWell, Iíll explain, June, the way he explained it to me. All characters really exist-at least, in the minds of the authors. But when people really begin to believe in them, they begin to exist in reality, because what people believe in, is, so far as theyíre concerned, and what is existence anyway?î
Juneís lips trembled. ìOh, Gramie, please donít. Mother will never let me marry you if they put you in an asylum.î
ìDonít call me Gramie, June, for Godís sake. I tell you he was there, trying to tell me what to write and how to write it. He was almost as bad as you. Aw, come on, Baby, donít cry.î
ìI canít help it. I always thought you were crazy, but I never thought you were crazy!î
ìAll right, whatís the difference? Letís not talk about it, any more. Iím never going to write another mystery novel. After all-î (he indulged in a bit of indignation)-îwhen it gets so that my own character-my own character-tries to tell me what to do, itís going too farÖ
June looked over her handkerchief. ìHow do you know it was really de Meister?î
ìOh, golly. As soon as he tapped his Turkish cigarette on the back of his hand and started dropping gís like snowflakes in a blizzard, I knew the worst had come.î
The telephone rang. June leaped up. ìDonít answer, Graham. Itís probably from the asylum. Iíll tell them youíre not here. Hello. Hello. Oh, Mr. MacDunlapÖ She heaved a sigh of relief, then covered the mouthpiece and whispered horasely, ìIt might be a trap.î
ìHello, Mr. MacDunlap!ÖNo, heís not hereÖYes, I think I can get in touch with himÖAt Martinís tomorrow, noonÖ Iíll tell himÖWith who?ÖWith who???î She hung up suddenly.
ìGraham, youíre to lunch with MacDunlap tomorrowÖ
ìAt his expense! Only at his expense!î
Her great blue eyes got greater and bluer, ìAnd Reginald de Meister is to dine with youÖ
ìWhat Reginald de Meister?î
ìYour Reginald de Meister.î
ì My Reg-î
ìOh, Gramie, donítÖ Her eyes misted, ìDonít you see, Gramie, now theyíll put us both in an insane asylum-and Mr. MacDunlap, too. And theyíll probably put us all in the same padded cell. Oh, Gramie, three is such a dreadful crowd.î
And her face crumpled into tears.
Grew S. MacDunlap (that the S. stands for ìSomeî is a vile untruth spread by his enemies) was alone at the table when Graham Dorn entered. Out of this fact, Graham extracted a few fleeting drops of pleasure.
It was not so much, you understand, the presence of MacDunlap that did it, as the absence of de Meister.
MacDunlap looked at him over his spectacles and swallowed a liver pill, his favorite sweetmeat
ìAha. Youíre here. What is this corny joke youíre putting over on me? You had no right to mix me up with a person like de Meister without warning me he was real. I might have taken precautions. I could have hired a bodyguard. I could have bought a revolver.î
ìHeís not real. God damn it! Half of him was your idea.
ìThat,î returned MacDunlap with heat, ìis libel. And what do you mean, heís not real? When he introduced himself, I took three liver pills at once and he didnít disappear. Do you know what three pills are? Three pills, the kind Iíve got (the doctor should only drop dead), could make an elephant disappear-if he werenít real. I know.î
Graham said wearily, ìJust the same, he exists only in my mind.î
ìIn your mind, I know he exists. Your mind should be investigated by the Pure Food and Drugs Act.î
The several polite rejoinders that occurred simultaneously to Graham were dismissed almost immediately as containing too great a proportion of pithy Anglo-Saxon expletives. After all-ha, ha-a publisher is a publisher however Anglo-Saxony he may be.
Graham said, ìThe question arises, then, how weíre to get rid of de Meister.î
ìGet rid of de Meister?î MacDunlap jerked the glasses off his nose in his sudden start, and caught them in one hand. His voice thickened with emotion. ìWho wants to get rid of him?î
ìDo you want him around?î
ìGod forbid,î MacDunlap said between shudders. ìNext to him, my brother-in-law is an angel.î
ìHe has no business outside my books.î
ìFor my part, he has no business inside them. Since I started reading your manuscripts, my doctor added kidney pills and cough syrups to my medicines.î He looked at his watch, and took a kidney pill. ìMy worst enemy should be a book publisher only a year.î
ìThen why,î asked Graham patiently, ìdonít you want to get rid of de Meister?î
ìBecause he is publicity.î
Graham stared blankly.
ìLook! What other writer has a real detective? All the others are fictional. Everyone knows that. But yours-yours is real. We can let him solve cases and have big newspaper writeups. Heíll make the Police Department look silly. Heíll make-î
ìThat, ì interrupted Graham, categorically, ìis by all odds the most obscene proposal I have ever had my ears manured with.î
ìIt will make money.î
ìMoney isnít everything.î
ìName one thing it isnítÖShh!î He kicked a near-fracture into Grahamís left ankle and rose to his feet with a convulsive smile, ìMI. de Meister!î
ìSorry, old dear,î came a lethargic voice. ìCouldnít quite make it, you know. Loads of engagements. Must have been most boriní for you.î
Graham Domís ears quivered spasmodically. He looked over his shoulder and reeled backward as far as a person could reel while in a sitting position. Reginald de Meister had sprouted a monocle since his last visitation, and his monocular glance was calculated to freeze blood.
De Meisterís greeting was casual. ìMy dear Watson! So glad to meet you. Overjoyed deucedly.î
ìWhy donít you go to hell?î Graham asked curiously.
ìMy dear fellow. Oh, my dear fellow.î
MacDunlap cackled, ìThatís what I like. Jokes! Fun! Makes everything pleasant to start with. Now shall we get down to business?î
ìCertainly. The dinner is on the way, I trust? Then Iíll just order a bottle of wine. The usual, Henry.î The waiter ceased hovering, Flew away, and skimmed back with a bottle that opened and gurgled into a glass.
De Meister sipped delicately, ìSo nice of you, old chap, to make me a habitue of this place in your stories. It holds true even now, and it is most convenient. The waiters all know me. Mr. MacDunlap, I take it you have convinced Mr. Dom of the necessity of continuing the de Meister stories.î
ìYes,î said MacDunlap. ì
ìNo,î said Graham.
ìDonít mind him,î said MacDunlap. ìHeís temperamental. You know these authors.î
ìDonít mind him,î said Graham. ìHeís microcephalic. You know these publishers.î
ìLook, old chappie. I take it MacDunlap hasnít pointed out to you the unpleasanter side of acting stubborn.î
ìFor instance what, old stinkie?î asked Graham, courteously.
ìWell, have you ever been haunted?î
ìLike coming behind me and saying, Boo?î
ìMy dear fellow, I say. Iím much more subtle than that. I can really haunt one in modem, up-to-date methods. For instance, have you ever had your individuality submerged?î
He snickered.
There was something familiar about that snicker. Graham suddenly remembered. It was on page 103 of Murder Rides the Range:
His lazy eyelids flicked down and up. He laughed lightly and melodiously, and though he said not a word, Hank Marslowe covered. There was hidden menace and hidden power in that light laugh, and somehow the burly rancher did not dare reach for his guns.
To Graham it still sounded like a nasty snicker, but he cowered, and did not dare reach for his guns.
MacDunlap plunged through the hole the momentary silence had created.
ìYou see, Graham. Why play around with ghosts? Ghosts arenít reasonable things. Theyíre not human! If itís more royalties, you want-î
Graham fired up. ìWill you refrain from speaking of money? From now on, I write only great novels of tearing human emotions.î
MacDunlapís flushed face changed suddenly. ì
ìNo,î he said.
ìIn fact, to change the subject just a moment-î and Grahamís tone became surpassingly sweet, as the words got all sticky with maple syrup-îI have a manuscript here for you to look at.î
He grasped the perspiring MacDunlap by the lapel firmly. ìIt is a novel that is the work of five years. A novel that will grip you with its intensity. A novel that will shake you to the core of your being. A novel that will open a new world. A novel that will-î
ìNo,î said MacDunlap.
ìA novel that will blast the falseness of this world. A novel that pierces to the truth. A novel-î
MacDunlap, being able to stretch his hand no higher, took the manuscript.
ìNo,î he said.
ìWhy the bloody hell donít you read it?î inquired Graham.
ìNow?î
ìWell, start it.î
ìLook, supposing I read it tomorrow, or even the next day. I have to take my cough syrup now.î
ìYou havenít coughed once since I got here.î
ìIíll let you know immediately-î
ìThis,î said Graham, ìis the first page. Why donít you begin it? It will grip you instantly.î
MacDunlap read two paragraphs and said, ìIs this laid in a coalmining town?î
ìYes.î
ìThen I canít read it. Iím allergic to coal dust.î
ìBut itís not real coal dust, Mac Idiot.î
ìThat,î pointed out MacDunlap, ìis what you said about de Meister.î
Reginald de Meister tapped a cigarette carefully on the back of his hand in a subtle manner which Graham immediately recognized as betokening a sudden decision.
ìThat is all devastatiníly boriní, you know. Not quite gettiní to the point, you might say. Go ahead, MacDunlap, this is no time for half measures.î
MacDunlap girded his spiritual loins and said, ì All right Mister Dorn, with you itís no use being nice. Instead of de Meister, Iím getting coal dust. Instead of the best publicity in fifty years, Iím getting social significance. All right, Mister Smartaleck Dorn, if in one week you donít come to terms with me, good terms, you will be blacklisted in every reputable publishing firm in the United States and foreign parts.î He shook his finger and added in a shout, ìIncluding Scandinavian.î
Graham Dornlaughed lightly, ìPish,î he said, ìtush. I happen to be an officer of the Authorís Union, and if you try to push me around Iíll have you blacklisted. How do you like that?î
ìI like it fine. Because supposing I can prove youíre a plagiarist.î
ìMe,î gasped Graham, recovering narrowly from merry suffocation.
ìMe, the most original writer of the decade.î
ìIs that so? And maybe you donít remember that in each case you write up, you casually mention de Meisterís notebooks on previous cases.î
ìSo what?î
ìSo he has them. Reginald, my boy, show Mister Dom your notebook of your last case. -you see that. Thatís Mystery of the Milestones and it has, in detail, every incident in your book-and dated the year before the book was published. Very authentic.î
ìAgain so what?î
ìHave you maybe got the right to copy his notebook and call it an original murder mystery?î
ìWhy, you case of mental poliomyelitis, that notebook is my invention.î
ìWho says so? Itís in de Meisterís handwriting, as any expert can prove. And maybe you have a piece of paper, some little contract or agreement, you know, that gives you the right to use his notebooks?î
ìHow can I have an agreement with a mythical personage?î
ìWhat mythical personage?î
ìYou and I know de Meister doesnít exist.î
ìAh, but does the jury know? When I testify that I took three strong liver pills and he didnít disappear, what twelve men will say he doesnít exist?î
ìThis is blackmail.î
ìCertainly. Iíll give you a week. Or in other words, seven days.î
Graham Dorn turned desperately to de Meister. ìYouíre in on this, too. In my books I give you the keenest sense of honor. Is this honorable?î
De Meister shrugged. ìMy dear fellow. All this-and haunting, too.î
Graham rose.
ìWhere are you going?î
ìHome to write you a letter.î Grahamís brows beetled defiantly. ì And this time Iíll mail it. Iím not giving in. Iíll fight to the last ditch. And, de Meister, you let loose with one single little haunt and Iíll rip your head out of its socket and spurt the blood all over MacDunlapís new suit.î
He stalked out, and as he disappeared through the door, de Meister disappeared through nothing at all.
MacDunlap let out a soft yelp and then took a liver pill, a kidney pill, and a tablespoon of cough syrup in rapid succession.
Graham Dorn sat in Juneís front parlor, and having long since consumed his fingernails, was starting on the first knuckles.
June, at the moment, was not present, and this, Graham felt, was just as well. A dear girl; in fact, a dear, sweet girl But his mind was not on her.
It was concerned instead with a miasmic series of flashbacks over the preceding six days:
óSay, Graham, I met your side-kick at the club yesterday. You know, de Meister. Got an awful shock. I always had the idea he was a sort of Sherlock Holmes that didnít exist. Thatís one on me, boy. Didnít know-Hey, where are you going?
óHey, Dorn, I hear your boss de Meister is back in town. Ought to have material for more stories soon. Youíre lucky youíve got someone to grind out your plots ready-made-Huh? Well, goodbye.î
óWhy, Graham, darling, wherever were you last night? Annís affair didnít get anywhere without you; or at least, it wouldnít have, if it hadnít been for Reggie de Meister. He asked after you; but then, I guess he felt lost without his Watson. It must feel wonderful to Watson for such- Mister Dorn! And the same to you, sir!
óyou put one over on me. I thought you made up those wild things. Well, truth is stranger than fiction, ha, ha!
óPolice officials deny that the famous amateur criminologist Reginald de Meister has interested himself in this case. Mr. de Meister himself could not be reached by our reporters for comment. Mr. de Meister is best known to the public for his brilliant solutions to over a dozen crimes, as chronicled in fiction form by his so-called ìWatson,î Mr. Grayle Doone.
Graham quivered and his arms trembled in an awful desire for blood. De Meister was haunting him-but good. He was losing his individuality, exactly as had been threatened.
It gradually dawned upon Graham that the monotonous ringing noise he heard was not in his head, but, on the contrary, from the front door.
Such seemed likewise the opinion of Miss June Billings, whose piercing call shot down the stairs and biffed Graham a sharp uppercut to the ear-drums.
ìHey, dope, see whoís at the front door, before the vibration tears the house down. Iíll be down in half an hour.î
ìYes, dear!î
Graham shuffled his way to the front door and opened it.
ìAh, there. Greetinís,î said de Meister, and brushed past.
Grahamís dull eyes stared, and then fired high, as an animal snarl burst from his lips. He took up that gorilla posture, so comforting to red-blooded American males at moments like this, and circled the slightly-confused detective.
ìMy dear fellow, are you ill?î
ìI,î explained Graham, ìam not ill, but you will soon be past all interest in that, for I am going to bathe my hands in your heartís reddest blood.î
ìBut I say, youíll only have to wash them afterwards. It would be such an obvious clue, wouldnít it?î
ìEnough of this gay banter. Have you any last words?î
ìNot particularly.î
ìItís just as well. Iím not interested in your last words.î
He thundered into action, bearing down upon the unfortunate de Meister like a bull elephant. De Meister faded to the left, shot out an arm and a foot, and Graham described a parabolic arc that ended in the total destruction of an end table, a vase of flowers, a fish-bowl, and a five-foot section of wall.
Graham blinked, and brushed away a curious goldfish from his left eyebrow.
ìMy dear fellow,î murmured de Meister, ìoh, my dear fellow.î
Too late, Graham remembered that passage in Pistol Parade:
De Meisterís arms were whipcord lightning, as with sure, rapid thrusts, he rendered the two thugs helpless. Not by brute force, but by his expert knowledge of judo, he defeated them easily without hastening his breath. The thugs groaned in pain.
Graham groaned in pain.
He lifted his right thigh an inch or so to let his femur slip back into place.
ìHadnít you better get up, old chap?î
ìI will stay here,î said Graham with dignity, ìand contemplate the floor in profile view, until such time as it suits me or until such time as I find myself capable of moving a muscle. I donít care which. And now, before I proceed to take further measures with you, what the hell do you want?î
Reginald de Meister adjusted his monocle to a nicety. ìYou know, I suppose, that MacDunlapís ultimatum expires tomorrow?î
ìAnd you and he with it, I trust.î
ìYou will not reconsider.î
ìHa!î
ìReally,î de Meister sighed, ìthis is boriní no end. You have made things comfortable for me in this world. After all, in your books youíve made me well-known in all the clubs and better restaurants, the bosom friend, yíknow, of the mayor and commissioner of police, the owner of a Park Avenue penthouse and a magnificent art collection. And it all lingers over, old chap. Really quite afIectiní.î
ìIt is remarkable,î mused Graham, ìthe intensity with which I am not listening and the distinctness with which I do not hear a word you say.î
ìStill,î said de Meister, ìthere is no denyiní my book world suits me better. It is somehow more fascinatiní, freer from dull logic, more apart from the necessities of the world. In short, I must go back, and to active participation. You have till tomorrow!î
Graham hummed a gay little tune with flat little notes.
ìIs this a new threat, de Meister?î
ìIt is the old threat intensified. Iím going to rob you of every vestige of your personality. And eventually public opinion will force you to write as, to paraphrase you, de Meisterís Compleat Stooge. Did you see the name the newspaper chappies pinned on you today, old man?î
ìYes, Mr. Filthy de Meister, and did you read a half-column item on page ten in the same paper. Iíll read it for you: ëNoted Criminologist in l-A. Will be inducted shortly draft board says.îë
For a moment, de Meister said and did nothing. And then one, after another, he did the following things: removed his monocle slowly, sat down heavily, rubbed his chin abstractedly, and lit a cigarette after long and careful tamping. Each of these, Graham Dornís trained authorial eye recognized as singly representing perturbation and distress on the part of his character.
And never, in any of his books, did Graham remember a time when de Meister had gone through all four consecutively.
Finally, de Meister spoke. ìWhy you had to bring up draft registrations in your last book, I really donít know. This urge to be topical; this fiendish desire to be up to the minute with the news is the curse of the mystery novel. A true mystery is timeless; should have no relation to current events; should-î
ìThere is one way,î said Graham, ìto escape induction-î
ìYou might at least have mentioned a deferred classification on some vital ground.î
ìThere is one way,î said Graham, ìto escape induction-î
ìCriminal negligence,î said de Meister.
ìLook! Go back to the books and youíll never be filled with lead.î
ìWrite them and Iíll do it.î
ìThink of the war.î
ìThink of your ego.î
Two strong men stood face to face (or would have, if Graham werenít still horizontal) and neither flinched.
Impasse!
And the sweet, feminine voice of June Billings interrupted and snapped the tension:
ìMay I ask, Graham Dom, what you are doing on the floor. Itís been swept today and youíre not complimenting me by attempting to improve the job.î
ìI am not sweeping the floor. If you looked carefully,î replied Graham gently, ìyou would see that your own adored fiance is lying here a mass of bruises and a hotbed of pains and aches.î
ìYouíve ruined my end table!î
ìIíve broken my leg.î
ìAnd my best lamp.î
ìAnd two ribs.î
ìAnd my fishbowl.î
ìAnd my Adamís apple.î
ìAnd you havenít introduced your friend.î
ìAnd my cervical verte-What friend?î
ìThis friend.î
ìFriend! Ha!î And a mist came over his eyes. She was so young, so fragile to come into contact with hard, brutal facts of life. ìThis,î he muttered brokenly, ìis Reginald de Meister.î
De Meister at this point broke a cigarette sharply in two, a gesture pregnant with the deepest emotion.
June said slowly, ìWhy-why, youíre different from what I had thought.î
ìHow had you expected me to look?î asked de Meister, in soft, thrilling tones.
ìI donít know. Differently than you do,-from the stories I heard.î
ìYou remind me, somehow, Miss Billings, of Letitia Reynolds.î
ìI think so. Graham said he drew her from me.î
ìA very poor imitation, Miss Billings. Devastatiníly poor.î
They were six inches apart now, eyes fixed with a mutual glue, and Graham yelled sharply. He sprang upright as memory smote him a nasty smite on the forehead.
A passage from Case of the Muddy Overshoe occurred to him. Likewise one from The Primrose Murders. Also one from The Tragedy of Hartley Manor, Death of a Hunter, White Scorpion and, to put it in a small nutshell, from every one of the others.
The passage read:
There was a certain fascination about de Meister that appealed irresistibly to women.
And June Billings was-as it had often, in Grahamís idler moments, occurred to him-a woman.
And fascination simply gooed out of her ears and coated the floor six inches deep.
ìGet out of this room, June,î he ordered.
ìI will not.î
ìThere is something I must discuss with MI. de Meister, man to man. I demand that you leave this room.î
ìPlease go, Miss Billings,î said de Meister.
June hesitated, and in a very small voice said, ìVery well.î
ìHold on,î shouted Graham. ìDonít let him order you about. I demand that you stay.î
She closed the door very gently behind her.
The two men faced each other. There was that in either pair of eyes that indicated a strong man brought to bay. There was stubborn, undying antagonism; no quarter; no compromise. It was exactly the sort of situation Graham Dom always presented his readers with, when two strong men fought for one hand, one heart, one girl.
The two said simultaneously, ìLetís make a deal!î
Graham said, ìYou have convinced me, Reggie. Our public needs us. Tomorrow I shall begin another de Meister story. Let us shake hands and forget the past.î
De Meister struggled with his emotion. He laid his hand on Grahamís lapel, ìMy dear fellow, it is I who have been convinced by your logic. I canít allow you to sacrifice yourself for me. There are great things in you that must be brought out. Write your coal-mining novels. They count, not I.î
ìI couldnít, old chap. Not after all youíve done for me, and all youíve meant to me. Tomorrow we start anew.î
ìGraham, my-my spiritual father, I couldnít allow it. Do you think I have no feelings, filial feelings-in a spiritual sort of way.î
ìBut the war, think of the war. Mangled limbs. Blood All that.î
ìI must stay. My country needs me.î
ìBut if I stop writing, eventually you will stop existing. I canít allow that.î
ìOh, that!î De Meister laughed with a careless elegance. ìThings have changed since. So many people believe in my existence now that my grip upon actual existence has become too firm to be broken. I donít have to worry about Limbo any more.î
ìOh.î Graham clenched his teeth and spoke in searing sibilants: ìSo thatís your scheme, you snake. Do you suppose I donít see youíre stuck on June?î
ìLook here, old chap,î said de Meister haughtily. ìI canít permit you to speak slightingly of a true and honest love. I love June and she loves me-I know it. And if youíre going to be stuffy and Victorian about it, you can swallow some nitro-glycerine and tap yourself with a hammer.î
ìIíll nitro-glycerine you! Because Iím going home tonight and beginning another de Meister story. Youíll be part of it and youíll get back into it, and what do you think of that?î
ìNothing, because you canít write another de Meister story. Iím too real now, and you canít control me just like that. And what do you think of that?î
It took Graham Dom a week to make up his mind what to think of that, and then his thoughts were completely and startlingly unprintable.
In fact, it was impossible to write.
That is, startling ideas occurred to him for great novels, emotional dramas, epic poems, brilliant essays-but he couldnít write anything about Reginald de Meister.
The typewriter was simply fresh out of Capital Rís.
Graham wept, cursed, tore his hair, and anointed his finger tips with liniment. He tried typewriter, pen, pencil, crayon, charcoal, and blood.
He could not write.
The doorbell rang, and Graham threw it open.
MacDunlap stumbled in, falling over the first drifts of torn paper directly into Grahamís arms.
Graham let him drop. ìHah!î he said, with frozen dignity.
ìMy heart!î said MacDunlap, and fumbled for his liver pills.
ìDonít die there,î suggested Graham, courteously. ìThe management wonít permit me to drop human flesh into the incinerator.î
ìGraham, my boy,î MacDunlap said, emotionally, ìno more ultimatums! No more threats! I come now to appeal to your finer feelings, Graham-î he went through a slight choking interlude-îI love you like a son. This skunk de Meister must disappear. You must write more de Meister stories for my sake. Graham-I will tell you something in private. My wife is in love with this detective. She tells me I am not romantic. I! Not romantic! Can you understand it?î
ìI can,î was the tragic response. ìHe fascinates all women.î
ìWith that face? With that monocle?î
ìIt says so in all my books.î
MacDunlap stiffened. ìAh ha. You again. Dope! If only you ever stopped long enough to let your mind know what your typewriter was saying.î
ìYou insisted. Feminine trade.î Graham didnít care any more. Women! He snickered bitterly. Nothing wrong with any of them that a block-buster wouldnít fix.
MacDunlap hemmed. ìWell, feminine trade. Very necessary. -but Graham, what shall I do? Itís not only my wife. She owns fifty shares in MacDunlap, Inc. in her own name. If she leaves me, I lose control. Think of it, Graham. The catastrophe to the publishing world.î
ìGrew, old chap,î Graham sighed a sigh so deep, his toenails quivered sympathetically. ìI might as well tell you. June, my fiancee, you know, loves this worm. And he loves her because she is the prototype of Letitia Reynolds.î
ìThe what of Letitia?î asked MacDunlap, vaguely suspecting an insult.
ìNever mind. My life is ruined.î He smiled bravely and choked back the unmanly tears, after the first two had dripped off the end of his nose.
ìMy poor boy!î The two gripped hands convulsively.
ìCaught in a vise by this foul monster,î said Graham.
ìTrapped like a German in Russia,î said MacDunlap.
ìVictim of an inhuman fiend,î said Graham.
ìExactly,î said MacDunlap. He wrung Grahamís hand as if he were milking a cow. ìYouíve got to write de Meister stories and get him back where, next to Hell, he most belongs. Right?î
ìRight! But thereís one little catch.î
ìWhat?î
ìI canít write. Heís so real now, I canít put him into a book.î
MacDunlap caught the significance of the massed drifts of used paper on the floor. He held his head and groaned, ìMy corporation! My wife!î
ìThereís always the Army,î said Graham.
MacDunlap looked up. ìWhat about Death on the Third Deck, the novel I rejected three weeks ago?î
ìThat doesnít count. Itís past history. Itís already affected him.î
ìWithout being published?î
ìSure. Thatís the story I mentioned his draft board in. The one that put him in l-A.î
ìI could think of better places to put him.î
ìMacDunlap!î Graham Dorn jumped up, and grappled MacDunlapís lapel. ìMaybe it can be revised.î
MacDunlap coughed hackingly, and stifled out a dim grunt.
ìWe can put anything we want into it.î MacDunlap choked a bit.
ìWe can fix things up.î
MacDunlap turned blue in the face.
Graham shook the lapel and everything thereto attached, ìSay something, wonít you?î
MacDunlap wrenched away and took a tablespoon of cough syrup. He held his hand over his heart and patted it a bit. He shook his head and gestured with his eyebrows.
Graham shrugged. ìWell, if you just want to be sullen, go ahead. Iíll revise it without you.î
He located the manuscript and tried his fingers gingerly on the typewriter. They went smoothly, with practically no creaking at the joints. He put on speed, more speed, and then went into his usual race, with the portable jouncing along merrily under the accustomed head of steam.
ìItís working,î he shouted. ìI canít write new stories, but I can revise old, unpublished ones.î
MacDunlap watched over his shoulder. He breathed only at odd moments.
ìFaster,î said MacDunlap, ìfaster!î
ìFaster than thirty-five?î said Graham, sternly. ìOPA [The Office of Price Administration was in charge of gasoline rationing at this period. Remember ìAîstickers? D.R.B.] forbid! Five more minutes.î
ìWill he be there?î
ìHeís always there. Heís been at her house every evening this week.î He spat out the fine ivory dust into which he had ground the last inch of his incisors. ìBut God help you if your secretary falls down on the job.î
ìMy boy, on my secretary you can depend.î
ìSheís got to read that revision by nine.î
ìIfshe doesnít drop dead.î
ìWith my luck, she will. Will she believe it?î
ìEvery word. Sheís seen de Meister. She knows he exists.î
Brakes screeched, and Grahamís soul cringed in sympathy with every molecule of rubber frictioned off the tires.
He bounded up the stairs, MacDunlap hobbling after.
He rang the bell and burst in at the door. Reginald de Meister standing directly inside received the full impact of a pointing finger, and only a rapid backward movement of the head kept him from becoming a one-eyed mythical character.
June Billings stood aside, silent and uncomfortable.
ìReginald de Meister,î growled Graham, in sinister tones, ìprepare to meet your doom.î
ìOh, boy,î said MacDunlap, ìare you going to get it.î
ìAnd to what,î asked de Meister, ìam I indebted for your dramatic but unilluminatiní statement? Confusiní, donít you know.î He lit a cigarette with a fine gesture and smiled.
ìHello, Gramie,î said June, tearfully. ì
ìScram, vile woman.î
June sniffed. She felt like a heroine out of a book, tom by her own emotions. Naturally, she was having the time of her life.
So she let the tears dribble and looked forlorn.
ìTo return to the subject, what is this all about?î asked de Meister, wearily.
ìI have rewritten Death on the Third Deck.î
ìWell?î
ìThe revision,î continued Graham, ìis at present in the hands of MacDunlapís secretary, a girl on the style of Miss Billings, my fiancee that was. That is, she is a girl who aspires to the status of a moron, but has not yet quite attained it. Sheíll believe every word. ì
ìWell?î
Grahamís voice grew ominous, ìYou remember, perhaps, Sancho Rodriguez?î
For the first time, Reginald de Meister shuddered. He caught his cigarette as it dropped. ìShe was killed by Sam Blake in the sixth chapter. She was in love with me. Really, old fellow, what messes you get me into.î
ìNot half the mess youíre in now, old chap. Sancha Rodriguez did not die in the revision.î
ìDie!î came a sharp, but clear female voice, ìIíll show him if I died. And where have you been this last month, you two-crosser?î
De Meister did not catch his cigarette this time. He didnít even try. He recognized the apparition. To an unprejudiced observer, it might have been merely a svelte Latin girl equipped with dark, flashing eyes, and long, glittering fingernails, but to de Meister, it was Sancha Rodriguez -undead!
MacDunlapís secretary had read and believed.
ìMiss Rodriguez,î throbbed de Meister, charmingly, ìhow fascinatiní to see you.î
ìMrs. de Meister to you, you double-timer, you two-crosser, you scum of the ground, you scorpion of the grass. And who is this woman?î
June retreated with dignity behind the nearest chair.
Mrs. de Meister,î said Reginald pleadingly, and turned helplessly to Graham Dom.
ìOh, you have forgotten, have you, you smooth talker, you low dog. Iíll show you what it means to deceive a weak woman. Iíll make you mince-meat with my fingernails.î
De Meister back-pedaled furiously. ìBut darling-î
ìDonít you make sweet talk. What are you doing with this woman?î
ìBut, darling-î
ìDonít give me any explanation. What are you doing with this woman?î
ìBut darling-î
ìShut up! What are you doing with this woman?î
Reginald de Meister was up in a comer, and Mrs. de Meister shook her fists at him. ì Answer me?î
De Meister disappeared.
Mrs. de Meister disappeared right after him. June Billings collapsed into real tears.
Graham Dorn folded his arms and looked sternly at her. MacDunlap rubbed his hands and took a kidney pill.
ìIt wasnít my fault, Gramie,î said June. ìYou said in your books he fascinated all women, so I couldnít help it. Deep inside, I hated him all along. You believe me, donít you?î
ìA likely story!î said Graham, sitting down next to her on the sofa. ì A likely story. But I forgive you, maybe.î
MacDunlap said tremulously, ìMy boy, you have saved my stocks. Also, my wife, of course. And remember-you promised me one de Meister story each year.î
Graham gritted, ìJust one, and Iíll henpeck him to death, and keep one unpublished story forever on hand, just in case. And youíre publishing my novel, arenít you, Grew, old boy?î
ìGlug,î said MacDunlap.
ìArenít you?î
ìYes, Graham. Of course, Graham. Definitely, Graham. Positively, Graham.î
ìThen leave us now. There are matters of importance I must discuss with my fiancee.î
MacDunlap smiled and tiptoed out the door.
Ah, love, love, he mused, as he took a liver pill and followed it up by a cough-syrup chaser.



***



I might make two points aboutî Author! Author!î It seems to me that I was rather easier about handling romance in this story than in any previous one. Perhaps this is a reflection of the fact that it was the first story I ever wrote as a married man.
Secondly, there are the very dated references to rationing, the draft, and other social phenomena much on the mind of anyone living through World War II. I had warned Bensen of the existence of these references and of the inability of getting them out of the story by revision since they were integral to the plot. Bensen, however, shrugged them off and in his short introduction to the story said to the readers, ì And donít worry about the references to the OPA and Selective Service-consider them as part of the historical setting, just as you would a bodkin or a furbelow in a story of an earlier time.î
And I second that statement here.
Had I rested on the pink cloud of gratification that came with the sale of ì Author! Author!î for a few months, the death of Unknown might have disheartened me. It might have seemed to prove that I was not fated to reignite my career after all, and perhaps-again-everything would have turned out differently.
However, within three weeks of the sale I was at the typewriter again. The new story was ìDeath Sentenceî and it was science fiction. Writing was still slow work; seven weeks to do a 7,200-word story. On June 29, 1943, however, I sent it off to Campbell, and on July 8, it was accepted-one and a quarter cents per word again.
This meant that when the news of Unknownís demise arrived, it was cushioned by the fact that I already had another story written and sold.








Death Sentence


Brand Gorla smiled uncomfortably, ìThese things exaggerate, you know.î
ìNo, no, no!î The little manís albino-pink eyes snapped. ìDorlis was great when no human had ever entered the Vegan System. It was the capital of a Galactic Confederation greater than ours.î
ìWell, then, letís say that it was an ancient capital. Iíll admit that and leave the rest to an archaeologist.î
ìArchaeologists are no use. What Iíve discovered needs a specialist in its own field. And youíre on the Board.î
Brand Gorla looked doubtful. He remembered Theor Realo in senior year-a little white misfit of a human who skulked somewhere in the background of his reminiscences. It had been a long time ago, but the albino had been queer. That was easy to remember. And he was still queer.
ìIíll try to help,î Brand said, ìif youíll tell me what you want.î
Theor watched intently, ìI want you to place certain facts before the Board. Will you promise that?î
Brand hedged, ìEven if I help you along, Theor, Iíll have to remind you that Iím junior member of the Psychological Board. I havenít much influence.î
ìYou must do your best. The facts will speak for themselves.î The albinoís hands were trembling.
ìGo ahead.î Brand resigned himself. The man was an old school fellow. You couldnít be too arbitrary about things.
Brand Gorla leaned back and relaxed. The light of Arcturus shone through the ceiling-high windows, diffused and mellowed by the polarizing glass. Even this diluted version of sunlight was too much for the pink eyes of the other, and he shaded his eyes as he spoke.
ìIíve lived on Dorlis twenty-five years, Brand,î he said, ìIíve poked into places no one today knew existed, and Iíve found things. Dorlis was the scientific and cultural capital of a civilization greater than ours. Yes it was, and particularly in psychology.î
ìThings in the past always seem greater.î Brand condescended a smile. ìThere is a theorem to that effect which youíll find in any elementary text. Freshmen invariably call it the ìCOD Theorem.î Stands for ëGood-Old-Days,í you know. But go on.î
Theor frowned at the digression. He hid the beginning of a sneer, ìYou can always dismiss an uncomfortable fact by pinning a dowdy label to it. But tell me this. What do you know of Psychological Engineering?î
Brand shrugged, ìNo such thing. Anyway, not in the strict mathematical sense. All propaganda and advertising is a crude form of hit-and-miss Psych Engineering-and pretty effective sometimes. Maybe thatís what you mean.î
ìNot at all. I mean actual experimentation, with masses of people, under controlled conditions, and over a period of years.î
ìSuch things have been discussed. Itís not feasible in practice. Our social structure couldnít stand much of it, and we donít know enough to set up effective controls.î
Theor suppressed excitement, ìBut the ancients did know enough. And they did set up controls.î
Brand considered phlegmatically, ìStartling and interesting, but how do you know?î
ìBecause I found the documents relating to it.î He paused breathlessly. ìAn entire planet, Brand. A complete world picked to suit, peopled with beings under strict control from every angle. Studied, and charted, and experimented upon. Donít you get the picture?î
Brand noted none of the usual stigmata of mental uncontrol. A closer investigation, perhaps
He said evenly, ìYou must have been misled. Itís thoroughly impossible. You canít control humans like that. Too many variables.î
ìAnd thatís the point, Brand. They werenít humans.î
ìWhat?î
ìThey were robots, positronic robots. A whole world of them, Brand, with nothing to do but live and react and be observed by a set of psychologists that were Teal psychologists.î
ìThatís mad!î
ìI have proof-because that robot world still exists. The First Confederation went to pieces, but that robot world kept on going. It still exists.î
ìAnd how do you know?î
Theor Realo stood up. ìBecause Iíve been there these last twenty-five years!î
The Board Master threw his formal red-edged gown aside and reached into a pocket for a long, gnarled and decidedly unofficial cigar.
ìPreposterous,î he grunted, ìand thoroughly insane.î
ìExactly,î said Brand, ìand I canít spring it on the Board just like that. They wouldnít listen. Iíve got to get this across to you first, and then, if you can put your authority behind it-î
ìOh, nuts! I never heard anything as-Who is the fellow?î
Brand sighed, ì A crank, Iíll admit that. He was in my class at Arcturus u. and a crack-pot albino even then. Maladjusted as the devil, hipped on ancient history, and just the kind that gets an idea and goes through with it by plain. dumb plugging. Heís poked about in Dorlis for twenty-five years, he says. Heís got the complete records of practically an entire civilization.î
The Board Master puffed furiously. ìYeah, I know. In the telestat serials, the brilliant amateur always uncovers the great things. The free lance. The lone wolf. Nuts! Have you consulted the Department of Archaeology?î
ìCertainly. And the result was interesting. No one bothers with Dorlis. This isnít just ancient history, you see. Itís a matter of fifteen thousand years. Itís practically myth. Reputable archaeologists donít waste too much time with it. Itís just the thing a book-struck layman with a single-track mind would uncover. After this, of course, if the business turns out right, Dorlis will become an archaeologistís paradise.î
The Board Master screwed his homely face into an appalling grimace. ìItís very unflattering to the ego. If thereís any truth in all this, the so-called First Confederation must have had a grasp of psychology so far past ours, as to make us out to be blithering imbeciles. Too, theyíd have to build positronic robots that would be about seventy-five orders of magnitude above anything weíve even blueprinted. Galaxy! Think of the mathematics involved.î
ìLook, sir, Iíve consulted just about everybody. I wouldnít bring this thing to you if I werenít certain that I had every angle checked. I went to Blak just about the first thing, and heís consultant mathematician to United Robots. He says thereís no limit to these things. Given the time, the money, and the advance in psychology- getthat-robots like that could be built right now.î
ìWhat proof has he?î
ìWho, Blak?î
ìNo, no! Your friend. The albino. You said he had papers.î
ìHe has. Iíve got them here. Heís got documents-and thereís no denying their antiquity. Iíve had that checked every way from Sunday. I canít read them, of course. I donít know if anyone can, except Theor Realo.î
ìThatís stacking the deck, isnít it? We have to take his say-so.î
ìYes, in a way. But he doesnít claim to be able to decipher more than portions. He says it is related to ancient Centaurian, and Iíve put linguists to work on it. It can be cracked and if his translation isnít accurate, weíll know about it.î
ìAll right. Letís see it.î
Brand Gorla brought out the plastic-mounted documents. The Board Master tossed them aside and reached for the translation. Smoke billowed as he read.
ìHumph,î was his comment. ìFurther details are on Dorlis, I suppose.î
ìTheor claims that there are some hundred to two hundred tons of blueprints altogether, on the brain plan of the positronic robots alone. Theyíre still there in the original vault. But thatís the least of it. Heís been on the robot world itself. Heís got photocasts, teletype recordings, all sorts of details. Theyíre not integrated, and obviously the work of a layman who knows next to nothing about psychology. Even so, heís managed to get enough data to prove pretty conclusively that the world he was on wasnítÖuhÖnatural.î
ìYouíve got that with you, too.î
ìAll of it. Most of itís on microfilm, but Iíve brought the projector. Here are your eyepieces.î
An hour later, the Board Master said, ìIíll call a Board Meeting tomorrow and push this through.î
Brand Gorla grinned tightly, ìWeíll send a commission to Dorlis?î
ìWhen,î said the Board Master dryly, ìand if we can get an appropriation out of the University for such an affair. Leave this material with me for the while, please. I want to study it a little more.î
Theoretically, the Governmental Department of Science and Technology exercises administrative control over all scientific investigation. Actually, however, the pure research groups of the large universities are thoroughly autonomous bodies, and, as a general rule, the Government does not care to dispute that. But a general rule is not necessarily a universal rule.
And so, although the Board Master scowled and fumed and swore, there was no way of refusing Wynne Murry an interview. To give Murry his complete title, he was under secretary in charge of psychology, psychopathy and mental technology. And he was a pretty fair psychologist in his own right.
So the Board Master might glare, but that was all.
Secretary Murry ignored the glare cheerfully. He rubbed his long chin against the grain and said, ìIt amounts to a case of insufficient information. Shall we put it that way?î
The Board Master said frigidly, ìI donít see what information you want. The governmentís say in university appropriations is purely advisory, and in this case, I might say, the advice is unwelcome.î
Murry shrugged, ìI have no quarrel with the appropriation. But youíre not going to leave the planet without government permit. Thatís where the insufficient information comes in.î
ìThere is no information other than weíve given you.î
ìBut things have leaked out. All this is childish and rather unnecessary secrecy.
The old psychologist flushed. ìSecrecy! If you donít know the academic way of life, I canít help you. Investigations, especially those of major importance, arenít, and canít be, made public, until definite progress has been made. When we get back, weíll send you copies of whatever papers we publish.î
Murry shook his head, ìUh-uh. Not enough. Youíre going to Dorlis, arenít you?î
ìWeíve informed the Department of Science of that.î
ìWhy?î
ìWhy do you want to know?î
ìBecause itís big, or the Board Master wouldnít go himself. Whatís this about an older civilization and a world of robots?î
ìWell, then, you know.î
ìOnly vague notions weíve been able to scrabble up. I want the details.î
ìThere are none that we know now. We wonít know until weíre on Dorlis.î
ìThen Iím going with you.î
ìWhat!î
ìYou see, I want the details, too.î
ìWhy?î
ìAh,î Murry unfolded his legs and stood up, ìnow youíre asking the questions. Itís no use, now. I know that the universities arenít keen on government supervision; and I know that I can expect no willing help from any academic source. But, by Arcturus, Iím going to get help this time, and I donít care how you fight it. Your expedition is going nowhere, unless I go with you-representing the government. ì
Dorlis, as a world, is not impressive. Itís importance to Galactic economy is nil, its position far off the great trade routes, its natives backward and unenlightened, its history obscure. And yet somewhere in the heaps of rubble that clutter an ancient world, there is obscure evidence of an influx of flame and destruction that destroyed the Dorlis of an earlier day-the greater capital of a greater Federation.
And somewhere in that rubble, men of a newer world poked and probed and tried to understand.
The Board Master shook his head and then pushed back his grizzling hair. He hadnít shaved in a week.
ìThe trouble is,î he said, ìthat we have no point of reference. The language can be broken, I suppose, but nothing can be done with the notation.î
ìI think a great deal has been done.î
ìStabs in the dark! Guessing games based on the translations of your albino friend. I wonít base any hopes on that.î
Brand said, ìNuts! You spent two years on the Nimian Anomaly, and so far only two months on this, which happens to be a hundred thousand times the job. Itís something else thatís getting you.î He smiled grimly. ìIt doesnít take a psychologist to see that the government man is in your hair.î
The Board Master bit the end off a cigar and spat it four feet. He said slowly, ìThere are three things about the mule-headed idiot that make me sore. First, I donít like government interference. Second, I donít like a stranger sniffing about when weíre on top of the biggest thing in the history of psychology. Third, what in the Galaxy does he want? What is he after?î
ìI donít know.î
ìWhat should he be after? Have you thought of it at all?î
ìNo. Frankly, I donít care. Iíd ignore him if I were you.î
ìYou would,î said the Board Master violently. ìYou would! You think the governmentís entrance into this affair need only be ignored. I suppose you know that this Murry calls himself a psychologist?î
ìI know that.î
ìAnd I suppose you know heís been displaying a devouring interest in all that weíve veen doing.î
ìThat, I should say, would be natural.î
ìOh! And you know further-î His voice dropped with startling suddenness. ìAll right, Murryís at the door. Take it easy.î
Wynne Murry grinned a greeting, but the Board Master nodded unsmilingly.
ìWell, sir,î said Murry bluffly, ìdo you know Iíve been on my feet for forty-eight hours? Youíve got something here. Something big.î
ìThank you.î
ìNo, no. Iím serious. The robot world exists.î
ìDid you think it didnít?î
The secretary shrugged amiably. ìOne has a certain natural skepticism. What are your future plans?î
ìWhy do you ask?î The Board Master grunted his words as if they were being squeezed out singly.
ìTo see if they jibe with my own.î
ìAnd what are your own?î
The secretary smiled. ìNo, no. You take precedence. How long do you intend staying here?î
ìAs long as it takes to make a fair beginning on the documents involved.î
ìThatís no answer. What do you mean by a fair beginning?î
ìI havenít the slightest idea. Itmight take years.î
ìOh, damnation.î
The Board Master raised his eyebrows and said nothing.
The secretary looked at his nails. ìI take it you know the location of this robot world.î
ìNaturally. Theor Realo was there. His information up to now has proven very accurate.î
ìThatís right. The albino. Well, why not go there?î
ìGo there! Impossible!î
ìMay I ask why?î
ìLook,î said the Board Master with restrained impatience, ìyouíre not here by our invitation, and weíre not asking you to dictate our course of actions, but just to show you that Iím not looking for a fight, Iíll give you a little metaphorical treatment of our case. Suppose we were presented with a huge and complicated machine, composed of principles and materials of which we knew next to nothing. It is so vast we canít even make out the relationship of the parts, let alone the purpose of the whole. Now, would you advise me to begin attacking the delicate mysterious moving parts of the machine with a detonating ray before I know what itís all about?î
ìI see your point, of course, but youíre becoming a mystic. The metaphor is farfetched.î
ìNot at all. These positronic robots were constructed along lines we know nothing of as yet and were intended to follow lines with which we are entirely unacquainted. About the only thing we know is that the robots were put aside in complete isolation, to work out their destiny by themselves. To ruin that isolation would be to ruin the experiment. If we go there in a body, introducing new, unforeseen factors, inducing unintended reactions, everything is ruined. The littlest disturbance-î
ìPoppycock! Theor Realo has already gone there.î
The Board Master lost his temper suddenly. ìDonít you suppose I know that? Do you suppose it would ever have happened if that cursed albino hadnít been an ignorant fanatic without any knowledge of psychology at all? Galaxy knows what the idiot has done in the way of damage.î
There was a silence. The secretary clicked his teeth with a thoughtful fingernail. ìI donít knowÖI donít know. But Iíve got to find out. And I canít wait years.î
He left, and the Board Master turned seethingly to Brand, ì And how are we going to stop him from going to the robot world if he wants to?î
ìI donít see how he can go if we donít let him. He doesnít head the expedition.î
ìOh, doesnít he? Thatís what I was about to tell you just before he came in. Ten ships of the fleet have landed on Dorlis since we arrived.î
ìWhat!î
ìJust that.î
ìBut what for?î
ìThat, my boy, is what I donít understand, eitherÖ
ìMind if I drop in?î said Wynne Murry, pleasantly, and Theor Realo looked up in sudden anxiety from the papers that lay in hopeless disarray on the desk before him.
ìCome in. Iíll clear off a seat for you.î The albino hustled the mess off one of the two chairs in a state of twittering nerves.
Murry sat down and swung one long leg over the other. ìAre you assigned a job here, too?î He nodded at the desk.
Theor shook his head and smiled feebly. Almost automatically, he brushed the papers together in a heap and turned them face down.
In the months since he had returned to Dorlis with a hundred psychologists of various degrees of renown, he had felt himself pushed farther and farther from the center of things. There was room for him no longer. Except to answer questions on the actual state of things upon the robot world, which he alone had visited, he played no part And even there he detected, or seemed to detect, anger that he should have gone, and not a competent scientist
It was a thing to be resented. Yet, somehow, it had always been like that
ìPardon me?î He had let Murryís next remark slip.
The secretary repeated, ìI say itís surprising youíre not put to work, then. You made the original discovery, didnít you?î
ìYes,î the albino brightened. ìBut it went out of my hands. It got beyond me.î
ìYou were on the robot world, though.î
ìThat was a mistake, they tell me. I might have ruined everything.î
Murry grimaced. ìWhat really gets them, I guess, is that youíve got a lot of first-hand dope that they didnít Donít let their fancy titles fool you into thinking youíre a nobody. A layman with common sense is better than a blind specialist You and I-Iím a layman, too, you know-have to stand up for our rights. Here, have a cigarette.î
ìI donít sm-Iíll take one, thank you.î The albino felt himself warming to the long-bodied man opposite. He turned the papers face upward again, and lit up, bravely but uncertainly.
ìTwenty-five years.î Theor spoke carefully, skirting around urgent coughs.
ìWould you answer a few questions about the world?î
ìI suppose so. Thatís all they ever ask me about But hadnít you better ask them? Theyíve probably got it all worked out now.î He blew the smoke as far from himself as possible.
Murry said, ìFrankly, they havenít even begun, and I want the information without benefit of confusing psychological translation. First of all, what kind of people-or things-are these robots? You havenít a photocast of one of them, have you?î
ìWell, no. I didnít like to take ëcasts of them. But theyíre not things. Theyíre people!î
ìNo? Do they look like-people?î
ìYes-mostly. Outside, anyway. I brought some microscopic studies of the cellular structure that I got hold of. The Board Master has them. Theyíre different inside, you know, greatly simplified. But youíd never know that. Theyíre interesting-and nice.î
ìAre they simpler than the other life of the planet?î
ìOh, no. Itís a very primitive planet. AndÖand,î he was interrupted by a spasm of coughing and crushed the cigarette to death as unobtrusively as possible. ìTheyíve got a protoplasmic base, you know. I donít think they have the slightest idea theyíre robots.î
ìNo. I donít suppose they would have. What about their science?î
ìI donít know. I never got a chance to see. And everything was so different. I guess it would take an expert to understand.î
ìDid they have machines?î
The albino looked surprised. ëWell, of course. A good many, of all sorts.î
ìLarge cities?î
ìYes!î
The secretaryís eyes grew thoughtful. ì And you like them. Why?î
Theor Realo was brought up sharply. ìI donít know. They were just likable. We got along. They didnít bother me so. Itís nothing I can put my finger on. Maybe itís because I have it so hard getting along back home, and they werenít as difficult as real people.î
ìThey were more friendly?î
ìN-no. Canít say so. They never quite accepted me. I was a stranger, didnít know their language at first-all that. Butî-he looked up with sudden brightness-îI understood them better. I could tell what they were thinking better. I-But I donít know why.î
ìHm-m-m. Well-another cigarette? No? Iíve got to be walloping the pillow now. Itís getting late. How about a twosome at golf tomorrow? Iíve worked up a little course. Itíll do. Come on out. The exercise will put hair on your chest.î
He grinned and left.
He mumbled one sentence to himself: ìIt looks like a death sentenceî-and whistled thoughtfully as he passed along to his own quarters.
He repeated the phrase to himself when he faced the Board Master the next day, with the sash of office about his waist. He did not sit down.
ìAgain?î said the Board Master, wearily.
ìAgain!î assented the secretary. ìBut real business this time. I may have to take over direction of your expedition.î
ìWhat! Impossible, sir! I will listen to no such proposition.î
ìI have my authority.î Wynne Murry presented the metalloid cylinder that snapped open at a flick of the thumb. ìI have full powers and full discretion as to their use. It is signed, as you will observe, by the chairman of the Congress of the Federation.î
ìSo-But why?î The Board Master, by an effort, breathed normally. ìShort of arbitrary tyranny, is there a reason?î
ìA very good one, sir. All along, we have viewed this expedition from different angles. The Department of Science and Technology views the robot world not from the point of view of a scientific curiosity, but from the standpoint of its interference with the peace of the Federation. I donít think youíve ever stopped to consider the danger inherent in this robot world.î
ìNone that I can see. It is thoroughly isolated and thoroughly harmless.î
ìHow can you know?î
ìFrom the very nature of the experiment,î shouted the Board Master angrily. ìThe original planners wanted as nearly a completely closed system as possible. Here they are, just as far off the trade routes as possible, in a thinly populated region of space. The whole idea was to have the robots develop free of interference.î
Murry smiled. ìI disagree with you there. Look, the whole trouble with you is that youíre a theoretical man. You look at things the way they ought to be and I, a practical man, look at things as they are. No experiment can be set up and allowed to run indefinitely under its own power. It is taken for granted that somewhere there is at least an observer who watches and modifies as circumstances warrant.î
ìWell?î said the Board Master stolidly.
ìWell, the observers in this experiment, the original psychologists of Dorlis, passed away with the First Confederation, and for fifteen thousand years the experiment has proceeded by itself. Little errors have added up and become big ones and introduced alien factors which induced still other errors. Itís a geometric progression. And thereís been no one to halt it.î
ìPure hypothesis.î
ìMaybe. But youíre interested only in the robot world, and Iíve got to think of the entire Federation.î
ìAnd just what possible danger call the robot world be to the Federation? I donít know what in Arcturus youíre driving at, man.î
Murry sighed. ìIíll be simple, but donít blame me if I sound melodramatic. The Federation hasnít had any internal warfare for centuries. What will happen if we come into contact with these robots?î
ìAre you afraid of one world?î
ìCould be. What about their science? Robots can do funny things sometimes.î
ìWhat science call they have? Theyíre not metal-electricity supermen. Theyíre weak protoplasmic creatures, a poor imitation of actual humanity, built around a positronic brain adjusted to a set of simplified human psychological laws. If the word ërobotí is scaring you-î
ìNo, it isnít, but Iíve talked to Theor Realo. Heís the only one whoís seen them, you know.î
The Board Master cursed silently and fluently. It came of letting a weak-minded freak of a layman get underfoot where he could babble and do harm.
He said, ìWeíve got Realoís full story, and weíve evaluated it fully and capably. I assure you, no harm exists in them. The experiment is so thoroughly academic, I wouldnít spend two days on it if it werenít for the broad scope of the thing. From what we see, the whole idea was to build up a positronic brain containing modifications of one or two of the fundamental axioms. We havenít worked out the details, but they must be minor, as it was the first experiment of this nature ever tried, and even the great mythical psychologists of that day had to progress stepwise. Those robots, I tell you, are neither supermen nor beasts. I assure you-as a psychologist.î
ìSorry! Iím a psychologist, too. A little more rule-of-thumb, Iím afraid. Thatís all. But even little modifications! Take the general spirit of combativeness. That isnít the scientific term, but Iíve no patience for that. You know what I mean. We humans used to be combative. But itís being bred out of us. A stable political and economic system doesnít encourage the waste energy of combat. Itís not a survival factor. But suppose the robots are combative. Suppose as the result of a wrong turn during the millennia theyíve been unwatched, theyíve become far more combative than ever their first makers intended. Theyíd be uncomfortable things to be with.î
ìAnd suppose all the stars in the Galaxy became novae at the same time. Letís really start worrying.î
ìAnd thereís another point.î Murry ignored the otherís heavy sarcasm. ìTheor Realo liked those robots. He liked robots better than he likes real people. He felt that he fitted there, and we all know heís been a bad misfit in his own world.î
ìAnd what,î asked the Board Master, ìis the significance of that?î
ìYou donít see it?î Wynne Murry lifted his eyebrows. ìTheor Realo likes those robots because he is like them, obviously. Iíll guarantee right now that a complete psychic analysis of Theor Realo will show a modification of several fundamental axioms, and the same ones as in the robots.
ìAnd,î the secretary drove on without a pause, ìTheor Realo worked for a quarter of a century to prove a point, when all science would have laughed him to death if they had known about it. Thereís fanaticism there; good, honest, inhuman perseverance. Those robots are probably like that!î
ìYouíre advancing no logic. Youíre arguing like a maniac, like a moon-struck idiot.î
ìI donít need strict mathematical proof. Reasonable doubt is sufficient. Iíve got to protect the Federation. Look, it is reasonable, you know. The psychologists of Dorlis werenít as super as all that. They had to advance stepwise, as you yourself pointed out. Their humanoids-letís not call them robots-were only imitations of human beings and they couldnít be good ones. Humans possess certain very, very complicated reaction systems-things like social consciousness, and a tendency toward the establishment of ethical systems; and more ordinary things like chivalry, generosity, fair play and so on, that simply canít possibly be duplicated. I donít think those humanoids can have them. But they must have perseverance, which practically implies stubbornness and combativeness, if my notion on Theor Realo holds good. Well, if their science is anywhere at all, then I donít want to have them running loose in the Galaxy, if our numbers are a thousand or million times theirs. And I donít intend to permit them to do so!î
The Board Masterís face was rigid. ìWhat are your immediate intentions?î
ìAs yet undecided. But I think I am going to organize a small-scale landing on the planet.î
ìNow, wait.î The old psychologist was up and around the desk. He seized the secretaryís elbow. ìAre you quite certain you know what youíre doing? The potentialities in this massive experiment are beyond any possible precalculation by you or me. You canít know what youíre destroying.î
ìI know. Do you think I enjoy what Iím doing? This isnít a heroís job. Iím enough of a psychologist to want to know whatís going on, but Iíve been sent here to protect the Federation, and to the best of my ability I intend doing it-and a dirty job it is. But I canít help.
ìYou canít have thought it out. What can you know of the insight it will give us into the basic ideas of psychology? This will amount to a fusion of two Galactic systems, that will send us to heights that will make up in knowledge and power a million times the amount of harm the robots could ever do, if they were metal-electricity supermen.î
The secretary shrugged. ìNow youíre the one that is playing with faint possibilities.î
ìListen, Iíll make a deal. Blockade them. Isolate them with your ships. Mount guards. But donít touch them. Give us more time. Give us a chance. You must!î
ìIíve thought of that. But I would have to get Congress to agree to that. It would be expensive, you know.î
The Board Master flung himself into his chair in wild impatience. ìWhat kind of expense are you talking about? Do you realize the nature of the repayment if we succeed?î
Murry considered; then, with a half smile, ìWhat if they develop interstellar travel?î
The Board Master said quickly, ìThen Iíll withdraw my objections.î
The secretary rose, ìIíll have it out with Congress.î
Brand Gorlaís face was carefully emotionless as he watched the Board Masterís stooped back. The cheerful pep talks to the available members of the expedition lacked meat, and he listened to them impatiently.
He said, ìWhat are we going to do now?î
The Board Masterís shoulders twitched and he didnít turn. ìIíve sent for Theor Realo. That little fool left for the Eastern Continent last week~
ìWhy?î
The older man blazed at the interruption. ìHow can I understand anything that freak does! Donít you see that Murryís right? Heís a psychic abnormality. We had no business leaving him unwatched. If I had ever thought of looking at him twice, I wouldnít have. Heís coming back now, though, and heís going to stay back.î His voice fell to a mumble. ìShould have been back two hours ago.î
ìItís an impossible position, sir,î said Brand, flatly.
ìThink so?î
ìWell-Do you think Congress will stand for an indefinite patrol off the robot world? It runs into money, and average Galactic citizens arenít going to see it as worth the taxes. The psychological equations degenerate into the axioms of common sense. In fact, I donít see why Murry agreed to consult Congress.î
ìDonít your The Board Master finally faced his junior. ìWell, the fool considers himself a psychologist, Galaxy help us, and thatís his weak point. He flatters himself that he doesnít want to destroy the robot world in his heart, but that itís the good of the Federation that requires it. And heíll jump at any reasonable compromise. Congress wonít agree to it indefinitely, you donít have to point that out to me.î He was talking quietly, patiently. ìBut I will ask for ten years, two years, six months-as much as I can get. Iíll get something. In that time, weíll learn new facts about the world. Somehow weíll strengthen our case and renew the agreement when it expires. Weíll save the project yet.î
There was a short silence and the Board Master added slowly and bitterly, ìAnd thatís where Theor Realo plays a vital part:í
Brand Gorla watched silently, and waited. The Board Master said, ìOn that one point, Murry saw what we didnít. Realo is a psychological cripple, and is our real clue to the whole affair. If we study him, weíll have a rough picture of what the robot is like, distorted of course, since his environment has been a hostile, unfriendly one. But we can make allowance for that, estimate his nature in a-Ahh, Iím tired of the whole subject ì
The signal box flashed, and the Board Master sighed. ìWell, heís here. All right, Gorla, sit down, you make me nervous. Letís take a look at him.î
Theor Realo came through the door like a comet and brought himself to a panting halt in the middle of the floor. He looked from one to the other with weak, peering eyes.
ìHow did all this happen?î
ìAll what?î said the Board Master coldly. ìSit down. I want to ask you some questions.î
ìNo. You first answer me.î
ìSit down!î
Realo sat His eyes were brimming. ìTheyíre going to destroy the robot world.î
ìDonít worry about thatî
ìBut you said they could if the robots discovered interstellar travel. You said so. You fool. Donít you see-î He was choking.
The Board Master frowned uneasily. ëWill you calm down and talk sense?î
The albino gritted his teeth and forced the words out. ìBut theyíll have interstellar travel before long.î
And the two psychologists shot toward the little man.
ìWhat!!î
ìWellÖwell, what do you think?î Realo sprang upward with all the fury of desperation. ìDid you think I landed in a desert or in the middle of an ocean and explored a world all by myself? Do you think life is a storybook? I was captured as soon as I landed and taken to a big city. At least, I think it was a big city. It was different from our kind. It had-But I wonít tell you.î
ìNever mind the city,î shrieked the Board Master. ìYou were captured. Go ahead.î
ìThey studied me. They studied my machine. And then, one night, I left, to tell the Federation. They didnít know I left. They didnít want me to leave.î His voice broke. ì And I would have stayed as soon as not, but the Federation had to know.î
ìDid you tell them anything about your ship?î
ìHow could I? Iím no mechanic. I donít know the theory or construction. But I showed them how to work the controls and let them look at the motors. Thatís all.î
Brand Gorla said, to himself mostly, ìThen theyíll never get it. That isnít enough.î
The albinoís voice raised itself in sudden shrieking triumph. ìOh, yes, they will. I know them. Theyíre machines, you know. Theyíll work on that problem. And theyíll work. And theyíll work. And theyíll never quit. And theyíll get it. They got enough out of me. Iíll bet they got enough.î
The Board Master looked long, and turned away-wearily. ìWhy didnít you tell us?î
ìBecause you took my world away from me. I discovered it-by myself-all by myself. And after I had done all the real work, and invited you in, you threw me out. All you had for me was complaints that I had landed on the world and might have ruined everything by interference. Why should I tell you? Find out for yourselves if youíre so wise, that you could afford to kick me around.î
The Board Master thought bitterly, ìMisfit! Inferiority complex! Persecution mania! Nice! It all fits in, now that weíve bothered to take our eyes off the horizon and see what was under our nose. And now itís all ruined.î
He said, ìAll right, Realo, we all lose. Go away.î
Brand Gorla said tightly, ìAllover? Really all over?î
The Board Master answered, ìReally all over. The original experiment, as such, is over. The distortions created by Realoís visit will easily be large enough to make the plans we are studying here a dead language. And besides-Murry is right. If they have interstellar travel, theyíre dangerous.î
Realo was shouting, ìBut youíre not going to destroy them. You canít destroy them. They havenít hurt anyone.î
There was no answer, and he raved on, ìIím going back. Iíll warn them. Theyíll be prepared. Iíll warn them.î
He was backing toward the door, his thin, white hair bristling, his red-rimmed eyes bulging.
The Board Master did not move to stop him when he dashed out.
ìLet him go. It was his lifetime. I donít care any more.î
Theor Realo smashed toward the robot world at an acceleration that was half choking him.
Somewhere ahead was the dustspeck of an isolated world with artificial imitations of humanity struggling along in an experiment that had died. Struggling blindly toward a new goal of interstellar travel that was to be their death sentence.
He was heading toward that world, toward the same city in which he had been ìstudiedî the first time. He remembered it well. Its name was the first words of their language he had learned.
New York!



***



On July 26, 1943, which was a Monday, I had one of the rare days off I could take during wartime. (It was, after all, my first wedding anniversary.) I was in New York that day, and I visited Campbell just as in the good old days. I discussed with him another story in the ìFoundationî series, as well as another in the ìpositronic robotî series. From then on, I always saw Campbell on the rare days when I was in New York on a weekday, and of course we corresponded regularly.
I was definitely back at writing. Output was low, but during the remaining war years I wrote two positronic robot stories, ìCatch That Rabbitî and ìParadoxical Escape,î which appeared in the February 1944 and August 1945 issues of Astounding, respectively. Both were eventually included in I, Robot. (The latter story appears in I,Robot under the title of ìEscape.î The word ìParadoxicalî had been added by Campbell in one of his few title changes, and I didnít like it.)
I also wrote no less than four stories of the ìFoundationî series during those same years. These were ìThe Big and the Little,î ìThe Wedge,î ìDead Hand,î and ìThe Mule.î All appeared in Astounding, of course, the first three in the August 1944, October 1944, and April 1945 issues, respectively.
ìThe Muleî set several records for me. It was the longest story I had ever written up to that time-fifty thousand words long. Yet even so, and despite the fact that I had to work on it in small scraps of time left over from job and marriage, I managed to complete it in three and a half months. It was submitted on May 21, 1945, and was accepted on the twenty-ninth. (Indeed, throughout the war I never got a single rejection, or even a delayed acceptance. Nor did I submit to anyone but Campbell.)
Whatís more, at the beginning of 1944 Campbell raised his basic rate to one and a half cents a word and some months later to a cent and three quarters. For ìThe Muleî I received a check at the higher rate, for $875. It was by far the largest check I ever received for a single story. By the end of the war, in fact, I was making half as much money writing in my spare time as I was making at my N.A.E.S. job, even though I had been promoted and was receiving sixty dollars a week by the end of the war.
Then, too, ìThe Muleî was the first story I ever had published as a serial. It appeared in two parts in the November and December 1945 issues of Astounding.
Of the wartime ìFoundationî stories, ìThe Big and the Littleî and ìThe Wedgeî are included in Foundation, while ìDead Handî and ìThe Mule,î together, make up all of Foundation and Empire.
During the two years between mid-1943 and mid-1945, I wrote only one story that was neither one of the ìFoundationî series nor one of the ìPositronic robotî series, and that one was inspired directly by the N.A.E.S. This story was ìBlind Alley,î which was written during September and early October of 1944. It was submitted to Campbell on October 10, and accepted on the twentieth.








Blind Alley





Only once in Galactic History was an intelligent race of non-Humans discovered-
ìEssays on History.î by Ligurn Vier









I



From: Bureau for the Outer Provinces

To: Loodun Antyok, Chief Public Administrator, A-8

 Subject: Civilian Supervisor of Cepheus 18, Administrative Position as,


References:
(a) Act of Council 2.515, of the year 971 of the Galactic Empire, entitled, ì Appointment of Officials of the Administrative Service, Methods for, Revision of.î
(b) Imperial Directive, Ja 2.374, dated 2.43/975 G.E.
1. By authorization of reference (a), you are hereby appointed to the subject position. The authority of said position as Civilian Supervisor of Cepheus 18 will extend over non-Human subjects of the Emperor living upon the planet under the terms of autonomy set forth in reference (b).
2. The duties of the subject position shall comprise the general supervision of all non-Human internal affairs, co-ordination of authorized government investigating and reporting committees, and the preparation of semiannual reports on all phases of non-Human affairs.



C. Morily, Chief,

BuOuProv, 12/977 G.E.


Loodun Antyok had listened carefully, and now he shook his round head mildly, ìFriend, Iíd like to help you, but youíve grabbed the wrong dog by the ears. Youíd better take this up with the Bureau.î
Tomor Zammo flung himself back into his chair, rubbed his beak of a nose fiercely, thought better of whatever he was going to say, and answered quietly, ìLogical, but not practical. I canít make a trip to Trantor now. Youíre the Bureauís representative on Cepheus 18. Are you entirely helpless?î
ìWell, even as Civilian Supervisor, Iíve got to work within the limits of Bureau policy.î
ìGood,î Zammo cried, ìthen, tell me what Bureau policy is. I head a scientific investigating committee, under direct Imperial authorization with, supposedly, the widest powers; yet at every angle in the road I am pulled up short by the civilian authorities with only the parrot shriek of ëBureau policyí to justify themselves. What is Bureau policy? I havenít received a decent definition yet.î
Antyokís gaze was level and unruffled. He said, ìAs I see it-and this is not official, so you canít hold me to it-Bureau policy consists in treating the non-Humans as decently as possible.î
ìThen, what authority have they-î
ì Ssh! No use raising your voice. As a matter of fact, His Imperial Majesty is a humanitarian and a disciple of the philosophy of Aurelion. I can tell you quietly that it is pretty well-known that it is the Emperor himself who first suggested that this world be established. You can bet that Bureau policy will stick pretty close to Imperial notions. And you can bet that I canít paddle my way against that sort of current.î
ìWell, míboy,î the physiologistís fleshy eyelids quivered, ìif you take that sort of attitude, youíre going to lose your job. No, I wonít have you kicked out. Thatís not what I mean at all. Your job will just fade out from under you, because nothing is going to be accomplished here!î
ìReally? Why?î Antyok was short, pink, and pudgy, and his plump-cheeked face usually found it difficult to put on display any expression other than one of bland and cheerful politeness-but it looked grave now.
ìYou havenít been here long. I have.î Zammo scowled. ìMind if I smoke?î The cigar in his hand was gnarled and strong and was puffed to life carelessly.
He continued roughly, ìThereís no place here for humanitarianism, administrator. Youíre treating non-Humans as if they were Humans, and it wonít work. In fact, I donít like the word ënon-Human.í Theyíre animals.î
ìTheyíre intelligent, ì interjected Antyok, softly.
ìWell, intelligent animals, then. I presume the two terms are not mutually exclusive. Alien intelligences mingling in the same space wonít work, anyway.î
ìDo you propose killing them off?î
ìGalaxy, no!î He gestured with his cigar. ìI propose we look upon them as objects for study, and only that. We could learn a good deal from these animals if we were allowed to. Knowledge, I might point out, that would be used for the immediate benefit of the human race. Thereís humanity for you. Thereís the good of the masses, if its this spineless cult of Aurelion that interests you.î
ìWhat, for instance, do you refer to?î
ìTo take the most obvious-you have heard of their chemistry, I take it?î
ìYes,î Antyok admitted. ìI have leafed through most of the reports on the non-Humans published in the last ten years. I expect to go through more.î
ìHmp. Well-then, all I need say is that their chemical therapy is extremely thorough. For instance, I have witnessed personally the healing of a broken bone-what passes for a broken bone with them, I mean-by the use of a pill. The bone was whole in fifteen minutes. Naturally, none of their drugs are any earthly use on Humans. Most would kill quickly. But if we found out how they worked on the non-Humans-on the animals-î
ìYes, yes. I see the significance.î
ìOh, you do. Come, thatís gratifying. A second point is that these animals communicate in an unknown manner.î
ìTelepathy!î
The scientistís mouth twisted, as he ground out, ìTelepathy! Telepathy! Telepathy! Might as well say by witch brew. Nobody knows anything about telepathy except its name. What is the mechanism of telepathy? What is the physiology and the physics of it? I would like to find out, but I canít. Bureau policy, if I listen to you, forbids.î
Antyokís little mouth pursed itself. ìBut-Pardon me, doctor, but I donít follow you. How are you prevented? Surely the Civil Administration has made no attempt to hamper scientific investigation of these non-Humans. I cannot speak for my predecessor entirely, of course, but I myself-î
ìNo direct interference has occurred. I donít speak of that. But by the Galaxy, administrator, weíre hampered by the spirit of the entire set-up. Youíre making us deal with humans. You allow them their own leader and internal autonomy. You pamper them and give them what Aurelionís philosophy would call ërights: I canít deal with their leader.î
ìWhy not?î
ìBecause he refuses to allow me a free hand. He refuses to allow experiments on any subject without the subjectís own consent. The two or three volunteers we get are not too bright. Itís an impossible arrangement.î
Antyok shrugged helplessly.
Zammo continued, ìIn addition, it is obviously impossible to learn anything of value concerning the brains, physiology, and chemistry of these animals without dissection, dietary experiments, and drugs. You know, administrator, scientific investigation is a hard game. Humanity hasnít much place in it. ì
Loodun Antyok tapped his chin with a doubtful finger, ìMust it be quite so hard? These are harmless creatures, these non-Humans. Surely, dissection-Perhaps, if you were to approach them a bit differently-I have the idea that you antagonize them. Your attitude might be somewhat overbearing.î
ìOverbearing! I am not one of these whining social psychologists who are all the fad these days. I donít believe you can solve a problem that requires dissection by approaching it with what is called the ëcorrect personal attitudeí in the cant of the times.î
ìIím sorry you think so. Sociopsychological training is required of all administrators above the grade of A-4.î
Zammo withdrew his cud of a cigar from his mouth and replaced it after a suitably contemptuous interval, ìThen youíd better use a bit of your technique on the Bureau. You know, I do have friends at the Imperial court.î
ìWell, now, I canít take the matter up with them, not baldly. Basic policy does not fall within my cognizance, and such things can only be initiated by the Bureau. But, you know, we might try an indirect approach on this.î He smiled faintly, ìStrategy.î
ìWhat sort?î
Antyok pointed a sudden finger, while his other hand fell lightly on the rows of gray-bound reports upon the floor just next his chair, ìNow, look, Iíve gone through most of these. Theyíre dull, but contain some facts. For instance, when was the last non-Human infant born on Cepheus 18?
Zammo spent little time in consideration. ìDonít know. Donít care either.î
ìBut the Bureau would. Thereís never been a non-Human infant born on Cepheus 18-not in the two years the world has been established. Do you know the reason?î
The physiologist shrugged, ìToo many possible factors. It would take study.î
ìAll right, then. Suppose you write a report-î
ìReports! Iíve written twenty.î
ìWrite another. Stress the unsolved problems. Tell them you must change your methods. Harp on the birth-rate problem. The Bureau doesnít dare ignore that. If the non-Humans die out, someone will have to answer to the Emperor. You see-î
Zammo stared, his eyes dark, ìThat will swing it?î
ìIíve been working for the Bureau for twenty-seven years. I know its ways.î
ìIíll think about it.î Zammo rose and stalked out of the office. The door slammed behind him.
It was later that Zammo said to a co-worker, ìHeís a bureaucrat, in the first place. He wonít abandon the orthodoxies of paper work and he wonít risk sticking his neck out. Heíll accomplish little by himself, yet maybe more than a little if we work through him. ì



 From: Administrative Headquarters, Cepheus 18

 To: BuOuProv

 Subject: Outer Province Project 2563, Part II-Scientific Investigations of non-Humans of Cepheus 18, Co-ordination of,


References:
(a) BuOuProv letr. Cep-N-CM/jg, 100132, dated 302/975 G.E.
(b) AdHQ-Ceph18 letr. AA-LA/mn, dated 140/977 G.E. Enclosure:
1. SciGroup 10, Physical amp; Biochemical Division, Report, entitled, ìPhysiologic Characteristics of non-Humans of Cepheus 18, Part XI,î dated 172/977 G.E.
1. Enclosure 1, included herewith, is forwarded for the information of the BuOuProv. It is to be noted that Section XII, paragraphs 1-16 of Encl. 1, concern possible changes in present BuOuProv policy with regard to non-Humans with a view to facilitating physical and chemical investigations at present proceeding under authorization of reference (a)
2. It is brought to the attention of the BuOuProv that reference (b) has already discussed possible changes in investigating methods and that it remains the opinion of AdHQ-Ceph18 that such changes are as yet premature. It is nevertheless suggested that the question of non-Human birth rate be made the subject of a BuOuProv project assigned to AdHQ-Ceph18 in view of the importance attached by SciGroup 10 to the problem, as evidenced in Section V of Enclosure 1.



L. Antyok, Supery,

AdHQ-Ceph18, 174/977




 From: BuOuProv

 To: AdHQ-Ceph18

 Subject: Outer Province Project 2563-Scientific Investigations of non-Humans of Cepheus 18, Co-ordination of,


Reference:
(a) AdHQ-Ceph18 letr. AA-LA/mn, dated 174/977 G.E.
1. In response to the suggestion contained in paragraph 2 of reference (a), it is considered that the question of the non-Human birth rate does not fall within the cognizance of AdHQ-Ceph18. In view of the fact that SciGroup 10 has reported said sterility to be probably due to a chemical deficiency in the food supply, all investigations in the field are relegated to SciGroup 10 as the proper authority.
2. Investigating procedures by the various SciGroups shall continue according to current directives on the subject. No changes in policy are envisaged.



C. Morily, Chief,

BuOuProv, 186/977 G.E.








II


There was a loose-jointed gauntness about the news reporter which made him appear somberly tall. He was Gustiv Bannerd, with whose reputation was combined ability-two things which do not invariably go together despite the maxims of elementary morality.
Loodum Antyok took his measure doubtfully and said, ìThereís no use denying that youíre right. But the SciGroup report was confidential. I donít understand how-î
ìIt leaked,î said Bannerd, callously. ìEverything leaks:í
Antyok was obviously baffled, and his pink face furrowed slightly, ìThen Iíll just have to plug the leak here. I canít pass your story. All references to SciGroup complaints have to come out. You see that, donít your
ìNo.î Bannerd was calm enough. ìItís important; and I have my rights under the Imperial directive. I think the Empire should know whatís going onÖ
ìBut it isnít going on,î said Antyok, despairingly. ìYour claims are all wrong. The Bureau isnít going to change its policy. I showed you the lettersÖ
ìYou think you can stand up against Zammo when he puts the pressure on?î the newsman asked derisively.
ìI will-if I think heís wrong.î
ìIf!î stated Bannerd flatly. Then, in a sudden fervor, ìAntyok, the Empire has something great here; something greater by a good deal than the government apparently realizes. Theyíre destroying it. Theyíre treating these creatures like animals.î
ìReally-î began Antyok, weakly.
ìDonít talk about Cepheus 18. Itís a zoo. Itís a high-class zoo, with your petrified scientists teasing those poor creatures with their sticks poking through the bars. You throw them chunks of meat, but you cage them up. I know! Iíve been writing about them for two years now. Iíve almost been living with them.ì
ìZammo says-î
ìZammo!î This with hard contempt.
ìZammo says,î insisted Antyok with worried firmness, ìthat we treat them too like humans as it is.î
The newsmanís straight, long cheeks were rigid, ìZammo is rather animallike in his own right. He is a science-worshiper. We can do with less of them. Have you read Aurelionís worksr The last was suddenly posed.
ìUmm. Yes. I understand the Emperor-î
ìThe Emperor tends towards us. That is good-better than the hounding of the last reign.î
ìI donít see where youíre heading?î
ìThese aliens have much to teach us. You understand? It is nothing that Zammo and his SciGroup can use; no chemistry, no telepathy. Itís a way of life; a way of thinking. The aliens have no crime, no misfits. What effort is being made to study their philosophy? Or to set them up as a problem in social engineering?î
Antyok grew thoughtful, and his plump face smoothed out, ìIt is an interesting consideration. It would be a matter for psychologists-î
ìNo good. Most of them are quacks. Psychologists point out problems, but their solutions are fallacious. We need men of Aurelion. Men of The Philosophy-î
ìBut look here, we canít turn Cepheus 18 intoÖinto a metaphysical study.î
ìWhy not? It can be done easily.î
ìHow?î
ìForget your puny test-tube peerings. Allow the aliens to set up a society free of Humans. Give them an untrammeled independence and allow an intermingling of philosophies-î
Antyokís nervous response came, ìThat canít be done in a day.î
ìWe can start in a day.î
The administrator said slowly, ìWell, I canít prevent you from trying to start:í He grew confidential, his mild eyes thoughtful, ìYouíll ruin your own game, though, if you publish SciGroup 10ís report and denounce it on humanitarian grounds. The Scientists are powerful.î
ìAnd we of The Philosophy as well.î
ìYes, but thereís an easy way. You neednít rave. Simply point out that the SciGroup is not solving its problems. Do so unemotionally and let the readers think out your point of view for themselves. Take the birth-rate problem, for instance. Thereís something for you. In a generation, the non-Humans might die out, for all science can do. Point out that a more philosophical approach is required. Or pick some other obvious point. Use your judgment, eh?î
Antyok smiled ingratiatingly as he arose, ìBut, for the Galaxyís sake, donít stir up a bad smell:í
Bannerd was stiff and unresponsive, ìyou may be right:î
It was later that Bannerd wrote in a capsule message to a friend, ìHe is not clever, by any means. He is confused and has no guiding-line through life. Certainly utterly incompetent in his job. But heís a cutter and a trimmer, compromises his way around difficulties, and will yield concessions rather than risk a hard stand. He may prove valuable in that. Yours in Aurelion.î



 From: AdHQ-Ceph18

 To: BuOuProv

 Subject: Birth rate of non-Humans on Cepheus 18, News Report on.


References:
(a) AdHQ-Ceph18 letr. AA-LA/mn, dated 174/977 G.E.
(b) Imperial Directive, Ja2374, dated 243/975 G.E. Enclosures:
1-G. Brannerd news report, date-lined Cepheus 18, 201/977 G.E.
2-G. Bannerd news report, datelined Cepheus 18, 2O3/977 G.E.
1. The sterility of non-Humans on Cepheus 18, reported to the BuOuProv in reference (a), has become the subject of news reports to the galactic press. The news reports in question are submitted herewith for the information of the BuOuProv as Enclosures 1 and 2. Although said reports are based on material considered confidential and closed to the public, the news reporter in question maintained his rights to free expression under the terms of reference (b).
2. In view of the unavoidable publicity and misunderstanding on the part of the general public now inevitable, it is requested that the BuOuProv direct future policy on the problem of non-Human sterility.



L. Antyok, Superv.

AdHQ-Ceph18, 2O9/977 G.E.




 From: BuOuProv

 To: AdHQ-Ceph18

 Subject: Birth rate of non-Humans on Cepheus 18, Investigation of.


References:
(a) AdHQ-Ceph18 letr. AA-LA/mn, dated 2O9/977 G.E.
(b) AdHQ-Ceph18 letr. AA-LA/mn, dated 174/977 G.E.
1. It is proposed to investigate the causes and the means of precluding the unfavorable birth-rate phenomena mentioned in references (a) and (b).A project is therefore set up, entitled, ìBirth rate of non-Humans on Cepheus 18, Investigation ofî to which, in view of the crucial importance of the subject, a priority of AA is given.
2. The number assigned to the subject project is 2910, and all expenses incidental to it shall be assigned to Appropriation number 18/78.



C. Morily, Chief,

BuOuProv, 223/977 G.E.








III


If Tomor Zammoís ill-humor lessened within the grounds of SciGroup 10 Experimental Station, his friendliness had not thereby increased. Antyok found himself standing alone at the viewing window into the main field laboratory.
The main field laboratory was a broad court set at the environmental conditions of Cepheus 18 itself for the discomfort of the experimenters and the convenience of the experimentees. Through the burning sand, and the dry, oxygen-rich air, there sparkled the hard brilliance of hot, white sunlight. And under the blaze, the brick-red non-Humans, wrinkled of skin and wiry of build, huddled in their squatting positions of ease, by ones and twos.
Zammo emerged from the laboratory. He paused to drink water thirstily. He looked up, moisture gleaming on his upper lip, ìLike to step in there?î
Antyok shook his head definitely, ìNo, thank you. Whatís the temperature right now?î
ìA hundred twenty, if there were shade. And they complain of the cold. Itís drinking time now. Want to watch them drink?î
A spray of water shot upward from the fountain in the center of the court, and the little alien figures swayed to their feet and hopped eagerly forward in a queer, springy half-run. They milled about the water, jostling one another. The centers of their faces were suddenly disfigured by the projection of a long and flexible fleshy tube, which thrust forward into the spray and was withdrawn dripping.
It continued for long minutes. The bodies swelled and the wrinkles disappeared. They retreated slowly, backing away, with the drinking tube flicking in and out, before receding finally into a pink, wrinkled mass above a wide, lipless mouth. They went to sleep in groups in the shaded angles, plump and sated.
ìAnimals!î said Zammo, with contempt.
ìHow often do they drink?î asked Antyok.
ìAs often as they want. They can go a week if they have to. We water them every day. They store it under their skin. They eat in the evenings. Vegetarians, you know.î
Antyok smiled chubbily, ìItís nice to get a bit of firsthand information occasionally. Canít read reports all the time.î
ìYes?î-noncommittally. Then, ìWhatís new? What about the lacy-pants boys on Trantor?î
Antyok shrugged dubiously, ìYou canít get the Bureau to commit itself, unfortunately. With the Emperor sympathetic to the Aurelionists, humanitarianism is the order of the day. You know that.î
There was a pause in which the administrator chewed his lip uncertainly. ìBut thereís this birth-rate problem now. Itís finally been assigned to AdHQ, you know-and double A priority, too.î
Zammo muttered wordlessly.
Antyok said, ìYou may not realize it, but that project will now take precedence over all other work proceeding on Cepheus 18. Itís important.î
He turned back to the viewing window and said thoughtfully with a bald lack of preamble. ìDo you think those creatures might be unhappy?î
ìUnhappy!î The word was an explosion.
ìWell, then,î Antyok corrected hastily, ìmaladjusted. You understand? Itís difficult to adjust an environment to a race we know so little of.î
ìSay-did you ever see the world we took them from?î
ìIíve read the reports-ì
ìReports!î-infinite contempt. ìIíve seen it. This may look like desert out there to you, but itís a watery paradise to those devils. They have all the food and water they can get. They have a world to themselves with vegetation and natural water flow, instead of a lump of silica and granite where fungi were force-grown in caves and water had to be steamed out of gypsum rock. In ten years, they would have been dead to the last beast, and we saved them. Unhappy? Ga-a-ah, if they are, they havenít the decency of most animals.î
ìWell, perhaps. Yet I have a notion.î
ìA notion? What is your notion?î Zammo reached for one of his cigars.
ìItís something that might help you. Why not study the creatures in a more integrated fashion? Let them use their initiative. After all, they did have a highly-developed science. Your reports speak of it continually. Give them problems to solve.î
ìSuch as?î
ìOhÖoh,î Antyok waved his hands helplessly. ìWhatever you think might help most. For instance, spaceships. Get them into the control room and study their reactions.î
ìWhy?î asked Zammo with dry bluntness.
ìBecause the reaction of their minds to tools and controls adjusted to the human temperament can teach you a lot. In addition, it will make a more effective bribe, it seems to me, than anything youíve yet tried. Youíll get more volunteers if they think theyíll be doing something interesting.î
ìThatís your psychology coming out. Hm-m-m. Sounds better than it probably is. Iíll sleep on it. And where would I get permission, in any case, to let them handle spaceships? Iíve none at my disposal, and it would take a good deal longer than it was worth to follow down the line of red tape to get one assigned to us.î
Antyok pondered, and his forehead creased lightly, ìIt doesnít have to be spaceships. But even so-lf you would write up another report and make the suggestion yourself-strongly, you understand-I might figure out some way of tying it up with my birth-rate project. A double-a priority can get practically anything, you know, without questions.î
Zammoís interest lacked a bit even of mildness, ìWell, maybe. Meanwhile, Iíve some basal metabolism tests in progress, and itís getting late. Iíll think about it. Itís got its points.î



 From: AdHQ-Ceph18

 To: BuOuProv

 Subject: Outer Province Project 2910 , Part I-Birth rate of non-Humans on Cepheus 18, Investigation of,


Reference :
(a) BuOuProv letr. Ceph-N-CM/car, 115097, 223/977G.E.
Enclosure:
1. SciGroup 10, Physical amp; Biochemical Division report, Part XV, dated 220/977 G.E.
1. Enclosure 1 is forwarded herewith for the information of the BuOuProv.
2. Special attention is directed to Section V, Paragraph 3 of Enclosure I in which it is requested that a spaceship be assigned SciGroup 10 for use in expediting investigations authorized by the BuOuProv. It is considered by AdHQ-Ceph18 that such investigations may be of material use in aiding work now in progress on the subject project, authorized by reference (a).It is suggested, in view of the high priority placed by the BuOuProv upon the subject project, that immediate consideration be given the SciGroupís request.



L. Antyok, Superv.

AdHQ-Ceph18, 240/977G.E.




 From: BuOuProv

 To: AdHQ-Ceph18

 Subject: Outer Province Project 2910-Birth rate of non-Humans on Cepheus 18, Investigation of.


Reference:
(a) AdHQ-Ceph18 leu. AA-LA/mn, dated 240/977 G.E.
1. Training Ship AN-R-2055 is being placed at the disposal of AdHQ-Ceph18 for use in investigation of non-Humans on Cepheus 18 with respect to the subject project and other authorized OuProv projects, as requested in Enclosure 1 to reference (a).
2. It is urgently requested that work on the subject project be expedited by all available means.

C. Morily, Head,

BuOuProv, 251/977 G.E.









IV


The little, bricky creature must have been more uncomfortable than his bearing would admit to. He was carefully wrapped in a temperature already adjusted to the point where his human companions steamed in their open shirts.
His speech was high-pitched and careful, ìI find it damp, but not unbearably so at this low temperature.î
Antyok smiled, ìIt was nice of you to come. I had planned to visit you, but a trial run in your atmosphere out there-î The smile had become rueful.
ìIt doesnít matter. You other worldlings have done more for us than ever we were able to do for ourselves. It is an obligation that is but imperfectly returned by the endurance on my part of a trilling discomfort.î His speech seemed always indirect, as if he approached his thoughts sidelong, or as if it were against all etiquette to be blunt.
Gustiv Bannerd, seated in an angle of the room, with one long leg crossing the other, scrawled nimbly and said, ìyou donít mind if I record all this?î
The Cepheid non-Human glanced briefly at the journalist, ìI have no objection.î
Antyokís apologetics persisted, ìThis is not a purely social affair, sir. I would not have forced discomfort on you for that. There are important questions to be considered, and you are the leader of your people.î
The Cepheid nodded, ìI am satisfied your purposes are kindly. Please proceed.î
The administrator almost wriggled in his difficulty in putting thoughts into words. ìIt is a subject,î he said, ìof delicacy, and one I would never bring up if it werenít for the overwhelming importance of theÖuhÖquestion. I am only the spokesman of my government-î
ìMy people consider the otherworld government a kindly one.î
ìWell, yes, they are kindly. For that reason, they are disturbed over the fact that your people no longer breed.î
Antyok paused, and waited with worry for a reaction that did not come. The Cepheidís face was motionless except for the soft, trembling motion of the wrinkled area that was his deflated drinking tube.
Antyok continued, ìIt is a question we have hesitated to bring up because of its extremely personal angles. Noninterference is my governmentís prime aim, and we have done our best to investigate the problem quietly and without disturbing your people. But, frankly, we-ì
ìHave failed?î finished the Cepheid, at the otherís pause.
ìYes. Or at least, we have not discovered a concrete failure to reproduce the exact environment of your original world; with, of course, the necessary modification to make it more livable. Naturally, it is thought there is some chemical shortcoming. And so I ask your voluntary help in the matter. Your people are advanced in the study of your own biochemistry. If you do not choose, or would rather not-î
ìNo, no, I can help:í The Cepheid seemed cheerful about it. The smooth Hat planes of his loose-skinned, hairless skull wrinkled in an alien response to an uncertain emotion. ìIt is not a matter that any of us would have thought would have disturbed you other-worldlings. That it does is but another indication of your well-meaning Kindness. This world we find congenial, a paradise in comparison to our old. It lacks in nothing. Conditions such as now prevail belong in our legends of the Golden Age.î
ìWell-î
ìBut there is a something; a something you may not understand. We cannot expect different intelligences to think alike.î
ìI shall try to understand.î The Cepheidís voice had grown soft, its liquid undertones more pronounced, ìWe were dying on our native world; but we were fighting. Our science, developed through a history older than yours, was losing; but it had not yet lost. Perhaps it was because our science was fundamentally biological, rather than physical as yours is. Your people discovered new forms of energy and reached the stars. Our people discovered new truths of psychology and psychiatry and built up a working society free of disease and crime.
ìThere is no need to question which of the two angles of approach was the more laudable, but there is no uncertainty as to which proved more successful in the end. In our dying world, without the means of life or sources of power, our biological science could but make the dying easier
ìAnd yet we fought. For centuries past, we had been groping toward the elements of atomic power, and slowly the spark of hope had glimmered that we might break through the two-dimensional limits of our planetary surface and reach the stars. There were no other planets in our system to serve as stepping stones. Nothing but some twenty light-years to the nearest star, without the knowledge of the possibility of the existence of other planetary systems, but rather of the contrary.
ìBut there is something in all life that insists on striving; even on useless striving. There were only five thousand of us left in the last days. Only five thousand. And our first ship was ready. It was experimental. It would probably have been a failure. But already we had all the principles of propulsion and navigation correctly worked out.,.
There was a long pause, and the Cepheidís small black eyes seemed glazed in retrospect.
The newspaperman put in suddenly, from his comer, ìAnd then we came?î
ìAnd then you came,î the Cepheid agreed simply. ìIt changed everything. Energy was ours for the asking. A new world, congenial and, indeed, ideal, was ours even without asking. If our problems of society had long been solved by ourselves, our more difficult problems of environment were suddenly solved for us, no less completely.î
ìWell?î urged Antyok.
ìWell-it was somehow not well. For centuries, our ancestors had fought towards the stars, and now the stars suddenly proved to be the property of others. We had fought for life, and it had become a present handed to us by others. There is no longer any reason to fight. There is no longer anything to attain. All the universe is the property of your race.î
ìThis world is yours,î said Antyok, gently.
ìBy sufferance. It is a gift. It is not ours by right.î
ìYou have earned it, in my opinion.î
And now the Cepheidís eyes were sharply fixed on the otherís countenance, ìYou mean well, but I doubt that you understand. We have nowhere to go, save this gift of a world. We are in a blind alley. The function of life is striving, and that is taken from us. Life can no longer interest us. We have no offspring-voluntarily. It is our way of removing ourselves from your way.î
Absent-mindedly, Antyok had removed the Fluoro-globe from the window seat, and spun it on its base. Its gaudy surface reflected light as it spun, and its three-foot-high bulk floated with incongruous grace and lightness in the air.
Antyok said, ìIs that your only solution? Sterility?î
ìWe might escape still,î whispered the Cepheid, ìbut where in the Galaxy is there place for us? It is all yours.î
ìYes, there is no place for you nearer than the Magellanic Clouds if you wished independence. The Magellanic Clouds-î
ìAnd you would not let us go of yourselves. You mean kindly, I know.î
ìYes, we mean kindly-but we could not let you go.î
ìIt is a mistaken kindness.î
ìPerhaps, but could you not reconcile yourselves? You have a world.î
ìIt is something past complete explanations. Your mind is different. We could not reconcile ourselves. I believe, administrator, that you have thought of all this before. The concept of the blind alley we find ourselves trapped in is not new to you.î
Antyok looked up, startled, and one hand steadied the fluoro-globe, ìCan you read my mind?î
ìIt is just a guess. A good one, I think.î
ìYes-but can you read my mind? The minds of humans in general, I mean. It is an interesting point. The scientists say you cannot, but sometimes I wonder if it is that you simply will not. Could you answer that? I am detaining you, unduly, perhaps.î
ìNoÖno-î But the little Cepheid drew his enveloping robe closer, and buried his face in the electrically-heated pad at the collar for a moment. ìYou other-worldlings speak of reading minds. It is not so at all, but it is assuredly hopeless to explain.î
Antyok mumbled the old proverb, ìOne cannot explain sight to a man blind from birth.î
ìYes, just so. This sense which you call ëmind reading,, quite erroneously, cannot be applied to us. It is not that we cannot receive the proper sensations, it is that your people do not transmit them, and we have no way of explaining to you how to go about it.î
ìHm-m-m.î
ìThere are times, of course, of great concentration or emotional tension on the part of an other-worldling when some of us who are more expert in this sense; more sharp-eyed, so to speak; detect vaguely something. It is uncertain; yet I myself have at times wondered-î
Carefully, Antyok began spinning the Fluoro-globe once more. His pink face was set in thought, and his eyes were fixed upon the Cepheid. Gustiv Bannerd stretched his fingers and reread his notes, his lips moving silently.
The fluoro-globe spun, and slowly the Cepheid seemed to grow tense as well, as his eyes shifted to the colorful sheen of the globeís fragile surface.
The Cepheid said, ìWhat is that?î
Antyok started, and his face smoothed into an almost chuckling placidity, ìThis? A Galactic fad of three years ago; which means that it is a hopelessly old-fashioned relic this year. It is a useless device but it looks pretty. Bannerd, could you adjust the windows to non-transmission?î
There was the soft click of a contact, and the windows became curved regions of darkness, while in the center of the room, the fluoro-globe was suddenly the focus of a rosy effulgence that seemed to leap outward in streamers. Antyok, a scarlet figure in a scarlet room, placed it upon the table and spun it with a hand that dripped red. As it spun, the colors changed with a slowly increasing rapidity, blended and fell apart into more extreme contrasts.
Antyok was speaking in an eerie atmosphere of molten, shifting rainbow, ìThe surface is of a material that exhibits variable fluorescence. It is almost weightless, extremely fragile, but gyroscopically balanced so that it rarely falls, with ordinary care. It is rather pretty, donít you think?î
From somewhere the Cepheidís voice came, ìExtremely pretty.î
ìBut it has outworn its welcome; outlived its fashionable existence.î
The Cepheidís voice was abstracted, ìIt is very pretty.î
Bannerd restored the light at a gesture, and the colors faded. The Cepheid said, ìThat is something my people would enjoy.î He stared at the globe with fascination.
And now Antyok rose. ìYou had better go. If you stay longer, the atmosphere may have bad effects. I thank you humbly for your kindness.î
ìI thank you humbly for yours.î The Cepheid had also risen.
Antyok said, ìMost of your people, by the way, have accepted our offers to them to study the make-up of our modem spaceships. You understand, I suppose, that the purpose was to study the reactions of your people to our technology. I trust that conforms with your sense of propriety.î
ìYou need not apologize. I, myself, have now the makings of a human pilot. It was most interesting. It recalls our own efforts-and reminds us of how nearly on the right track we were.î
The Cepheid left, and Antyok sat, frowning.
ìWell,î he said to Bannerd, a little sharply. ìYou remember our agreement, I hope. This interview canít be published.î
Bannerd shrugged, ìVery well.î
Antyok was at his seat, and his fingers fumbled with the small metal figurine upon his desk, ìWhat do you think of all this, Bannerd?î
ìI am sorry for them. I think I understand how they feel. We must educate them out of it. The Philosophy can do it.î
ìYou think so?î
ìYes.î
ìWe canít let them go, of course.î
ìOh, no. Out of the question. We have too much to learn from them. This feeling of theirs is only a passing stage. Theyíll think differently, especially when we allow them the completest independence.î
ìMaybe. What do you think of the fluoro-globes, Bannerd? He liked them. It might be a gesture of the right sort to order several thousand of them. The Galaxy knows, theyíre a drug on the market right now, and cheap enough.î
ìSounds like a good idea,î said Bannerd.
ìThe Bureau would never agree, though. I know them.î
The newsmanís eyes narrowed, ìBut it might be just the thing. They need new interests.î
ìYes? Well, we could do something. I could include your transcript of the interview as part of a report and just emphasize the matter of the globes a bit. After all, youíre a member of The philosophy and might have influence with important people, whose word with the Bureau might carry much more weight than mine. You understand-?î
ìYes,î mused Bannerd. ìYes.î



 From: AdHQ-Ceph18

 To: BuOuProv

 Subject: OuProv Project 2910, Part II; Birth rate of non-Humans on Cepheus 18, Investigation of.


Reference:
(a) BuOuProv letr. Cep-N-CM/car, 115097, dated 223/977 G.E.
Enclosure:
1. Transcript of conversation between L. Antyok of AdHQ-Ceph18, and Ni-San, High Judge of the non-Humans on Cepheus 18.
1. Enclosure I is forwarded herewith for the information of the BuOuProv.
2. The investigation of the subject project undertaken in response to the authorization of reference (a) is being pursued along the new lines indicated in Enclosure 1. The BuOuProv is assured that every means will be used to combat the harmful psychological attitude at present prevalent among the non-Humans.
3. It is to be noted that the High Judge of the non-Humans on Cepheus 18 expressed interest in fluoro-globes. A preliminary investigation into this fact of non-Human psychology has been initiated.



L. Antyok, Superv.

AdHQ-Ceph18, 272/977 G.E.




 From: BuOuProv

 To: AdHQ-Ceph18

 Subject: OuProv Project 2910; Birth rate of non-Humans on Cepheus 18, Investigation of.


Reference:
(a) AdHQ-Ceph18 letr. AA-LA/mn, dated 272/977 G.E.
1. With reference to Enclosure I of reference (a), five thousand fluoro-globes have been allocated for shipment to Cepheus 18, by the Department of Trade.
2. It is instructed that AdHQ-Ceph18 make use of all methods of appeasing non-Humansí dissatisfaction, consistent with the The necessities of obedience to Imperial proclamations.



C. Morily, Chief,

BuOuProv, 283/977 G.E.









V


The dinner was over, the wine had been brought in, and the cigars were out. The groups of talkers had formed, and the captain of the merchant fleet was the center of the largest. His brilliant white uniform quite outsparkled his listeners.
He was almost complacent in his speech: ìThe trip was nothing. Iíve had more than three hundred ships under me before this. Still, Iíve never had a cargo quite like this. What do you want with five thousand fluoro-globes on this desert, by the Galaxy!î
Loodun Antyok laughed gently. He shrugged, ìFor the non-Humans. It wasnít a difficult cargo, I hope.î
ìNo, not difficult. But bulky. Theyíre fragile, and I couldnít carry more than twenty to a ship, with all the government regulations concerning packing and precautions against breakage. But itís the governmentís money, I suppose.î
Zammo smiled grimly. ìIs this your first experience with government methods, captain?î
ìGalaxy, no,î exploded the spaceman. ìI try to avoid it, of course, but you canít help getting entangled on occasion. And itís an abhorrent thing when you are, and thatís the truth. The red tape! The paper work! Itís enough to stunt your growth and curdle your circulation. Itís a tumor, a cancerous growth on the Galaxy. Iíd wipe out the whole mess.î
Antyok said, ìYouíre unfair, captain. You donít understand.î
ìYes? Well, now, as one of these bureaucrats,î and he smiled amiably at the word, ìsuppose you explain your side of the situation, administrator.î
ìWell, now,î Antyok seemed confused, ìgovernment is a serious and complicated business. Weíve got thousands of planets to worry about in this Empire of ours and billions of people. Itís almost past human ability to supervise the business of governing without the tightest sort of organization. I think there are something like four hundred million men today in the Imperial Administrative Service alone, and in order to co-ordinate their efforts and to pool their knowledge, you must have what you call red tape and paper work. Every bit of it, senseless though it may seem, annoying though it may be, has its uses. Every piece of paper is a thread binding the labors of four hundred million humans. Abolish the Administrative Service and you abolish the Empire; and with it, interstellar peace, order, and civilization.î
ìCome-î said the captain.
ìNo. I mean it.î Antyok was earnestly breathless. ìThe rules and system of the Administrative set-up must be sufficiently all-embracing and rigid so that in case of incompetent officials, and sometimes one is appointed-you may laugh, but there are incompetent scientists, and newsmen, and captains, too-in case of incompetent officials, I say, little harm will be done. For, at the worst, the system can move by itself.ì
ìYes,î grunted the captain, sourly, ìand if a capable administrator should be appointed? He is then caught by the same rigid web and is forced into mediocrity.î
ìNot at all, ì replied Antyok, warmly. ì A capable man can work within the limits of the rules and accomplish what he wishes.î
ìHow?î asked Bannerd.
ìWellÖwell-î Antyok was suddenly ill at ease. ìOne method is to get yourself an A-priority project, or double-A, if possible.î
The captain leaned his head back for laughter, but never quite made it, for the door was flung open and frightened men were pouring in. The shouts made no sense at first. Then:
ìSir, the ships are gone. These non-Humans have taken them by force.î
ìWhat? All?î
ìEvery one. Ships and creatures-î
It was two hours later that the four were together again, alone in Antyokís office now.
Antyik said coldly, ìTheyíve made no mistakes. Thereís not a ship left behind, not even your training ship, Zammo. And there isnít a government ship available in this entire half of the Sector. By the time we organize a pursuit theyíll be out of the Galaxy and halfway to the Magellanic Clouds. Captain, it was your responsibility to maintain an adequate guard.î
The captain cried, ìIt was our first day out of space. Who could have known-î
Zammo interrupted fiercely, ìWait a while, captain. Iím beginning to understand. Antyok, ì his voice was hard, ìyou engineered this.î
ìI?î Antyokís expression was strangely cool, almost indifferent.
ìYou told us this evening that a clever administrator got an A-priority project assigned to accomplish what he wished. You got such a project in order to help the non-Humans escape.î
ìI did? I beg your pardon, but how could that be? It was you yourself in one of your reports that brought up the problem of the failing birth rate. It was Bannerd, here, whose sensational articles frightened the Bureau into making a double A-priority project out of it. I had nothing to do with it.î
ì You suggested that I mention the birth rate,î said Zammo, violently.
ìDid I?î said Antyok, composedly.
ìAnd for that matter,î roared Bannerd, suddenly, ìyou suggested that I mention the birth rate in my articles.î
The three ringed him now and hemmed him in. Antyok leaned back in his chair and said easily, ìI donít know what you mean by suggestions. If you are accusing me, please stick to evidence-legal evidence. The laws of the Empire go by written, filmed, or transcribed material, or by witnessed statements. All my letters as administrator are on me here, at the Bureau, and at other places. I never asked for an A-priority project. The Bureau assigned it to me, and Zammo and Bannerd are responsible for that. In print, at any rate.î
Zammoís voice was an almost inarticulate growl, ìYou hoodwinked me into teaching the creatures how to handle a spaceship.î
ìIt was your suggestion. I have your report proposing they be studied in their reaction to human tools on file. So has the Bureau. The evidence-the legal evidence, is plain. I had nothing to do with it.î
ìNor with the globes?î demanded Bannerd.
The captain howled suddenly, ìYou had my ships brought here purposely. Five thousand globes! You knew it would require hundreds of craft. ì
ìI never asked for globes,î said Antyok, coldly. ìThat was the Bureauís idea, although I think Bannerdís friends of The Philosophy helped that along.î
Bannerd fairly choked. He spat out, ìYou were asking that Cepheid leader if he could read minds. You were telling him to express interest in the globes.î
ìCome, now. You prepared the transcript of the conversation yourself, and that, too, is on file. You canít prove it.î He stood up, ìYouíll have to excuse me. I must prepare a report for the Bureau.î
At the door, Antyok turned. ìIn a way, the problem of the non-Humans is solved, even if only to their own satisfaction. Theyíll breed now, and have a world theyíve earned themselves. Itís what they wanted.
ìAnother thing. Donít accuse me of silly things. Iíve been in the Service for twenty-seven years, and I assure you that my paper work is proof enough that I have been thoroughly correct in everything I have done. And captain, Iíll be glad to continue our discussion of earlier this evening at your convenience and explain how a capable administrator can work through red tape and still get what he wants.î
It was remarkable that such a round. smooth baby-face could wear a smile quite so sardonic.



 From: BuOuProv

 To: Loodun Antyok, Chief Public Administrator, A-8

 Subject: Administrative Service, Standing in.


Reference:
(a) AdServ Court Decision 22874-Q , dated 1/978 G.E.
1. In view of the favorable opinion handed down in reference
(a) you are hereby absolved of all responsibility for the flight of non-Humans on Cepheus 18. It is requested that you hold yourself in readiness for your next appointment.



R. Horpritt, Chief,

AdServ, 15/978 G.E.



***



The letters that form a major part of this story (which contains one of my rare examples of extraterrestrial intelligences) are, you will be glad to know, based on the kind of material that routinely passed in and out of the N.A.E.S. (and, for all I know, still does).The turgid style is not my invention. I couldnít invent it if I tried.
When the story appeared, L. Sprague de Camp happily pointed out one Haw in the letter style: I had carelessly made someone in lower position, who was addressing someone in higher position, say, ìit is requestedî instead of ìit is suggested.î The underling can humbly suggest, but only an overling can harshly request.
ìBlind Alleyî has one distinction I would like to mention.
After the war, there began that Hood of science fiction anthologies that has been growing in width and depth ever since. Few, if any, science fiction writers have been anthologized as often as I have and the first one of my stories to be anthologized was not ìNightfallî or a ìpositronic robotî story or a ìFoundationî story. It was ìBlind Alley.î
In early 1946 Groff Conklin was putting out the first of his many science fiction anthologies-one called ìThe Best of Science Fictionî-and there you will find ìBlind Alley.î That story, for which Campbell had paid $148.75 (1?? a word) then earned another $42.50 (?? a word). This meant that ìBlind Alleyî had earned me 2?? a word, which was a record high at the time.
Strictly speaking, the money for the anthologization was paid to Street amp; Smith, but Street amp; Smith had the enlightened habit of turning such money over to the author-voluntarily and without legal compulsion. And this was the first indication I ever received, by the way, that a story could earn more money than that which it earned at the time of its original sale.
On May 8, 1945, one week before ìThe Muleî was completed, the war ended in Europe. Naturally, there was at once a move to demobilize as many of the men who had been fighting in Europe as possible, and to draft replacements from among those who had luxuriated at home.
All through the war, till then, I had been receiving regular draft deferments as a research chemist working in a position important to the war effort. Periodically, there were revisions of the draft rules, and it was a rare month in which it did not look at one time or another as though I might be drafted. (It kept me on my toes, I can tell you, but I did not feel particularly ill-used. My predominant feeling was that of a sneaking guilt at not being drafted and some shame that I was relieved at my deferment.)
During 1944, the uncertainty went so far that I was called in for a physical examination, and it at once turned out that my nearsightedness was so bad as to render me ineligible for the draft anyway.
After V-E Day, the navy yard was ordered to retain only some percentage of those of its deferred employees, allowing the remainder to be drafted. Presumably, the navy yard would select its most important employees to keep, but they knew a better trick, according to the tale we employees heard. They retained all draftable employees who met the physical requirements, and removed protection from those who did not meet them either because of age or physical defect. In this way, they hoped to keep them all-those who were fit, because they were declared necessary, and those who were overage or unfit, because they were overage or unfit.
I, as an unfit employee, was one of those declared non-essential.
And then (you guessed it) the Army lowered its physical requirements. The result was that those navy yard employees with bad eyes or other mild deficiencies were put in imminent peril of the draft, while others, who were in every way equivalent except that they were in good shape, were not. (You may well laugh.)
For four months after V-E Day, it was up and down with me and the draft and I never knew, on one day, whether I might not receive my induction notice on the next. While I waited, the atom bombs were dropping on Hiroshima and Nagasaki and the Japanese formally surrendered on September 2.
On September 7, 1945, I received my notice of induction. I didnít enjoy it, of course, but I tried to be philosophical. The war was over, and, whatever difficulties I might have during the two years I expected to be in, at least no one would be shooting at me. I entered the Army on November 1, 1945, as a buck private.
Naturally, during all the fuss over the draft, culminating in my induction, I did no writing. There was an eight-month hiatus, in fact, the longest in three years.
On January 7, 1946, however, while I was still working my way through basic training in Camp Lee, Virginia, I began another ìpositronic robotî story, called ìEvidence.î I made use of a typewriter in one of the administrative buildings.
Naturally, it was slow work. I didnít finish first draft till February 17, and then everything came to a halt when, the very next day, I discovered that I would be among those sent out to the South Pacific to participate in ìOperation Crossroads.î This was the first postwar atom bomb test, on the island of Bikini (which later gave its name to a bathing suit so skimpy as to react on the male constitution-in theory-like an atom bomb).The fact that a week later I received my check for the anthologization of ìBlind Alleyî did little to raise my spirits.
We left on March 2, 1946, traveling by train and ship, and arrived in Honolulu on March 15. There then began a long wait before we could go on to Bikini (the atom bomb test was postponed, of course).When time began to hang heavy enough, I returned to ìEvidence.î I persuaded a sympathetic librarian to lock me up in the building when it closed for lunch so that I had an hour each day absolutely alone at the typewriter. I finished the story on April 10, and mailed it off to Campbell the next day.
On April 29, I received word of its acceptance. By that time, the word rate had reached two cents.
I never did go to Bikini, by the way. Some administrative error back home ended the allotment being sent to my wife. I was sent back to the United States on May 28 to inquire into the matter; it was all straightened out by the time I was back at Camp Lee. As long as I was there, however, I applied for a ìresearch dischargeî on the ground that I was going back to my Ph.D. work. I was out of the Army, as a corporal, on July 26.
ìEvidenceî was the only Story I wrote while in uniform.
As Soon as I got out of the Army I made arrangements to return to Columbia, after an absence of a little over four years, and to resume my work toward my Ph.D. under Professor Dawson.
There was still no question in my mind that chemistry was my career, and my only career. In the four years of my marriage I had written nine science fiction stories and one fantasy and had sold them all-but all the sales had been to Campbell.
Since Unknown had died, I was terribly conscious that Astounding might die as well. If that happened, or if Campbell retired, I was not at all sure that I could continue selling.
The situation looked better postwar than prewar, to be sure. During the first four years of my marriage, I had earned $2667 as a writer, or an average of under $13 per week. This was about half again as well as I had been doing in my bachelor days, even though I was writing fewer stories.
The word rate had doubled, you see, and there was even the hope of subsidiary rights-extra money for already sold stories. ìBlind Alleyî had already placed in an anthology, and on August 30, 1946, only a month after I got out of the Army, I discovered that I had made a second such sale. A new science fiction anthology, ìAdventures in Time and Space,î edited by Raymond J. Healey and J. Francis McComas, was to include ìNightfallî and I was to receive $66.50 for that.
There was even more than anthologization sales. In that same month of August, the September 1946 issue of Astounding hit the stands with ìEvidenceî (Had I but known when writing it that by the time it was published I would be safely out of the Army!) Almost at once I received a telegram asking for the movie rights. The gentleman interested turned out to be none other than Orson Welles. In great excitement, I sold him the radio, television, and movie rights to the Story on September 20, and waited to become famous. (I couldnít become wealthy, because the entire payment in full was only $250.)
Unfortunately, nothing happened. To this day, Mr. Welles has never used the story. But the check was certainly useful toward paying my tuition.
Despite everything, though, it still seemed quite out of the question that I could ever possibly depend on writing for a year-in, year-out living, especially now that I was married and hoped, eventually, to have children.
So back to school it was, with a small savings account to serve as a cushion, with some veteransí benefits supplied by the government, and, of course, with the hope that I would make a little extra cash writing.
In September I wrote still another ìpositronic robotî story, ìLittle Lost Robot,î racing to complete it before the fall semester started and I grew immersed in my work. Campbell took it promptly and it appeared in the March 1947 issue of Astounding. Eventually, it and ìEvidenceî were included in I, Robot.
Once the semester started, it became difficult to find time to write. Toward the end of 1946, I managed to begin another ìFoundationî story, ìNow You See It-.î I finished it on February ~ 1947, and submitted it to Campbell on the fourth. By that time I was rather sick of the ìFoundationí series and I tried to write ìNow You See It-î in such a way as to make it the last of the series.
Campbell would have none of that. I had to revise the ending to permit a sequel, and on the fourteenth he took it. It appeared in the January 1948 Astounding and eventually made up the first third of my book Second Foundation.
In May 1947 I wrote a story that, for the first time in over two years, was neither a ìFoundationî story nor a ìpositronic robotî story. It was ìNo Connection.î I submitted it to Campbell on May 26, and it was accepted on the thirty-first.










No Connection


Raph was a typical American of his times. Remarkably ugly, too, by American standards of our times. The bony structure of his jaws was tremendous and the musculature suited it. His nose was arched and wide and his black eyes were small and forced wide apart by the span of said nose. His neck was thick, his body broad, his fingers spatulate, with strongly curved nails.
If he had stood erect, on thick legs with large, well-padded feet, he would have topped two and a half yards. Standing or sitting, his mass neared a quarter of a ton.
Yet his forehead rose in an unrestricted arc and his cranial capacity did not stint. His enormous hand dealt delicately with a pen, and his mind droned comfortably on as he bent over his desk.
In fact, his wife and most of his fellow-Americans found him a fine-looking fellow.
Which shows the alchemy of a long displacement along the time-axis.
Raph, Junior, was a smaller edition of our typical American. He was adolescent and had not yet lost the hairy covering of childhood. It spread in a dark, close-curled mat across his chest and back, but it was already thinning and perhaps within the year he would first don the adult shirt that would cover the proudly-naked skin of manhood.
But, meanwhile, he sat in breeches alone, and scratched idly at a favorite spot just above the diaphragm. He felt curious and just a little bored. It wasnít bad to come with his father to the museum when people were there. Today was a Closed-Day, however, and the empty corridors rang lonesomely when he walked along them.
Besides, he knew everything in it-mostly bones and stones.
Junior said: ìWhatís that thing?î
ìWhat thing?î Raph lifted his head and looked over his shoulder. Then he looked pleased. ìOh, thatís something quite new. Thatís a reconstruction of Primate Primeval. It was sent to me from the North River Grouping. Isnít it a nice job, though?î And he returned to his work, in the grip of a momentary twinge of pleasure. Private Primeval wasnít to go on exhibition for a week at least-not until he prepared an honorable place for it with suitable surroundings, but, for the moment, it was in his office and his own private darling.
Raph looked at the ìnice jobî with quite other emotions, however. What he saw was a spindly figure of contemptuous size, with thin legs and arms, hair-covered and owning an ugly, small-featured face with large, protruding eyes.
He said: ìWell, what is it, Pa?î
Raph stirred impatiently: ìItís a creature that lived many millions of years ago, we think. Thatís the way we think it looks.î
ìWhy?î insisted the youngster.
Raph gave up. Apparently, he would have to root out the subject and do away with it.
ìWell, for one thing we can tell about the muscles from the shape of the bones, and the positions where the tendons would fit and where some of the nerves would go. From the teeth we can tell the type of digestive system the animal would have, and from the foot-bones, what type of posture it would have. For the rest, we go by the principle of Analogy, that is, by the outside appearance of creatures that exist today that have the same kind of skeleton. For instance, thatís why heís covered with red hair. Most of the Primates today-theyíre little insignificant creatures, practically extinct-are red-haired, have bare callosities on the rump-î
Junior scurried behind the figure and satisfied himself on that score.
ì-have long, fleshy probosces, and short, shriveled ears. Their diets are unspecialized, hence the rather all-purpose teeth, and they are nocturnal, hence the large eyes. Itís all simple, really. Now, does that dispose of you, youngster?î
And then Junior, having thought and thought about it, came out with a disparaging: ìHe looks just like an Eekah to me, though. Just like an ugly, old Eekah.î
Raph stared at him. Apparently he had missed a point: ìAn Eekah?î he said, ìWhatís an Eekah? Is that an imaginary creature youíve been reading about?î
ìImaginary! Say, Pa, donít you ever stop at the Recorderís?î
This was an embarrassing question to answer, for ìPaî never did, or at least, never since his maturity. As a child, the Recorder, as custodian of the worldís spoken, written, and recorded fiction, had, of course, had an unfailing fascination. But he had grown up-
He said, tolerantly: ìAre there new stories about Eekahs? I remember none when I was young.î
ìYou donít get it, Pa.î One would almost suppose that the young Raph was on the very verge of an exasperation he was too cautious to express. He explained in wounded fashion: ìThe Eekahs are real things. They come from the Other World. Havenít you heard about that? Weíve been hearing about it in school, even, and in the Group Magazine. They stand upside down in their country, only they donít know it, and they look just like Olí Primeval there.î
Raph collected his astonished wits. He felt the incongruity of cross-examining his half-grown child for archeological data and he hesitated a moment. After all, he had heard some things. There had been word of vast continents existing on the other hemisphere of Earth. It seemed to him that there were reports of life on them. It was all hazy-perhaps it wasnít always wise to stick so closely to the field of oneís own interest.
He asked Junior: ìAre there Eekahs here among the Groupings?î
Junior nodded rapidly: ìThe Recorder says they can think as good as us. They got machines that go through the air. Thatís how they got here.î
ìJunior!î said Raph severely.
ìI ainít lying,î Junior cried with aggrieved virtue. ìYou ask the Recorder and see what he says.î
Raph slowly gathered his papers together. It was Closed-Day, but he could find the Recorder at his home, no doubt.
The Recorder was an elderly member of the Red River Gurrow Grouping and few alive could remember a time when he was not. He had succeeded to the post by general consent and filled it well, for he was Recorder for the same reason that Raph was curator of the museum. He liked to be, he wanted to be, and he could conceive no other life.
The social pattern of the Gurrow Grouping is difficult to grasp unless born into it, but there was a looseness about it that almost made the word ìpatternî incongruous. The individual Gurrow took whatever job he felt an aptitude for, and such work as was left over and needed to be done was done either in common, or consecutively by each according to an order determined by lot. Put so, it sounds too simple to work, but actually the traditions that had gathered with the five thousand years since the first Voluntary Grouping of Gurrahs was supposed to have been established, made the system complicated, flexible-and workable.
The Recorder was, as Raph had anticipated, at his home, and there was the embarrassment of renewing an old and unjustly neglected acquaintanceship. He had made use of the Recorderís reference library, of course, but always indirectly-yet he had once been a child, an intimate learner at the feet of accumulated wisdom, and he had let the intimacy lapse.
The room he now entered was more or less choked with recordings and, to a lesser degree, with printed material. The Recorder interspersed greetings with apologies.
ìShipments have come from some of the other Groupings,î he said. ìIt needs time for cataloguing, you know, and I canít seem to find the time I used to.î He lit a pipe and puffed strongly. ìSeems to me Iíll have to find a full-time assistant. What about your son, Raph? He clusters about here the way you did twenty years ago.î
ìYou remember those times?î
ìBetter than you do, I think. Think your son would like that?î
ìSuppose you talk to him. He might like to. I canít honestly say heís fascinated by archaeology.î Raph picked up a recording at random and looked at the identification tag: ìUm-m-m-from the Joquin Valley Grouping. Thatís a long way from here.î
ìA long wayÖ The Recorder nodded. ìI have sent them some of ours, of course. The works of our own Grouping are highly regarded throughout the continent,î he said, with proprietary pride. ìIn factî-he pointed the stem of his pipe at the other-îyour own treatise on extinct primates has been distributed everywhere. Iíve sent out two thousand copies and there are still requests. Thatís pretty good-for archaeology.î
ìWell, archaeology is why I am here-that and what my son says youíve been telling himÖ Raph had a little trouble starting: ìIt seems you have spoken of creatures called Eekahs from the Antipodes, and I would like to have such information as you have on them.î
The Recorder looked thoughtful: ìWell, I could tell you what I know offhand, or we could go to the Library and look up the references.î
ìDonít bother opening the Library for me. Itís a Closed-Day. Just give me some notion of things and Iíll search the references later.î
The Recorder bit at his pipe, shoved his chair back against the wall and de-focused his eyes thoughtfully. ìWell,î he said, ìI suppose it starts with the discovery of the continents on the other side. That was five years ago. You know about that, perhaps?î
ìOnly the fact of it. I know the continents exist, as everyone does now. I remember once speculating on what a shining new field it would be for archaeological research, but that is all.î
ìAh, then there is much else to tell you of. The new continents were never discovered by us directly, you know. It was five years ago that a group of non-Gurrow creatures arrived at the East Harbor Grouping in a machine that flew-by definite scientific principles, we found out later, based essentially on the buoyancy of air. They spoke a language, were obviously intelligent, and called themselves Eekahs. The Gurrows, of the East Harbor Grouping, learned their language-a simple one though full of unpronounceable sounds-and I have a grammar of it, if youíre interested-î
Raph waved that away.
The Recorder continued: ìThe Gurrows of the Grouping, with the aid of those of the Iron Mountain Grouping-which specialize in steel works, you know-built duplicates of the flying machine. A flight was made across the ocean, and I should say there are several dozens of volumes on all that-volumes on the flying machine, on a new science called aerodynamics, new geographies, even a new system of philosophy based on the plurality of intelligences. All produced at the East Harbor and Iron Mountain Groupings. Remarkable work for only five years, and all are available here:í
ìBut the Eekahs-are they still at the East Harbor Groupings?î
ìUm-m-m. Iím pretty certain they are. They refused to return to their own continents. They call themselves ëpolitical refugees.í ì
ìPoliti. Öwhat?î
ìItís their own language,î said the Recorder, ìand itís the only translation available.î
ìWell, why political refugees? Why not geological refugees, or oompah refugees. I should think a translation ought to make sense.î
The Recorder shrugged: ìI refer you to the books. Theyíre not criminals, they claim. I know only what I tell you.î
ìWell, then, what do they look like? Do you have pictures?î
ìAt the Library.î
ìDid you read my ëPrinciples of Archaeology?í ì
ìI looked through it.î
ìDo you remember the drawings of Primate Primeval?î
ìIím afraid not.î
ìThen, look, letís go down to the Library, after all.î
ìWell, sure.î The Recorder grunted as he rose.
The Administrator of the Red River Gurrow Grouping held a position in no way different in essentials from that of the Museum Curator, the Recorder or any other voluntary job holder. To expect a difference is to assume a society in which executive ability is rare.
Actually, all jobs in a Gurrow Grouping-where a ìjobî is defined as regular work, the fruits of which adhere to others in addition to the worker himself-are divided into two classes: one, Voluntary Jobs, and the other, Involuntary or Community Jobs. All of the first classification are equal. If a Gurrow enjoys the digging of useful ditches, his bent is to be respected and his job to be honored. If no one enjoys such burrowing and yet it is found necessary for comfort, it becomes a Community Job, done by lot or rotation according to convenience-annoying but unavoidable.
And so it was that the Administrator lived in a house no more ample and luxurious than others, sat at the head of no tables, had no particular title other than the name of his job, and was neither envied, hated, nor adored.
He liked to arrange Inter-Group trade, to supervise the common finances of the Group, and to judge the infrequent disagreements that arose. Of course, he received no additional food or energy privileges for doing what he liked.
It was not, therefore, to obtain permission, but to place his accounts in decent order, that Raph stopped in to see the Administrator. The Closed-Day had not yet ended. The Administrator sat peacefully in his after-dinner armchair, with an after-dinner cigar in his mouth, and an after-dinner book in his hand. Although there was something rather timeless about six children and a wife, even they had an after-dinner air about them.
Raph received a multiple greeting upon entering, and raised two hands to his ears, for if the various Administratelets (Only applicable title. Author.) had a job, it was noisemaking. Certainly, it was what they liked to do, and certainly others reaped most of the fruits therefrom, for their own eardrums were apparently impervious.
The Administrator shooed them.
Raph accepted a cigar.
ìI intend leaving the Grouping for a time, Lahr,î he said. ìMy job necessitates it.î
ìWe wonít enjoy your going, Raph. I hope it will not be for long.î
ìI hope not. What have we in Common Units?î
ìOh, ample for your purposes, Iím sure. Where do you intend going?î
ìTo the East Harbor Grouping.î
The Administrator nodded and blew out a thoughtful puff of smoke: ìUnfortunately, East Harbor has a surplus in their favor registered in our books-I can verify that, if you wish-but the Common Units of Exchange on hand will take care of transportation and necessary expenses.î
ìWell, thatís fine. But tell me, what is my status on the Community Job Roster?î
ìUm-m-m-Iíll have to get the rolls. Youíll excuse me a moment.î He trundled away, heaving his great weight across the room and out into the hallway. Raph paused to poke at the youngest of the children who rolled up to him, growling in mock ferocity with gleaming teeth-a black little bundle of thick fur, with the long, childish snout that had not yet broadened away from the shape of the animal ancestry of half a million years earlier.
The Administrator returned with a heavy ledger and large spectacles. He opened the ledger meticulously, riffled the pages to the proper place and then drew a careful finger down the columns.
He said: ìThereís only the question of the water supply, Raph. Youíre due on the Maintenance gang for this next week. Thereís nothing else due for at least two months.î
ìIíll be back before then. Is there any chance of someone subbing for me on the Water Maintenance?î
ìUm-m-m-Iíll get someone. I can always send my oldest. Heís getting to job age and he might as well taste everything. He may like working on the dam.î
ìYes? You tell me if he does, then. He can replace me, regularly.î
The Administrator smiled gently: ìDonít plan on that, Raph. If he can figure out a way of making sleeping useful to all of us, heíll certainly take it up as a job. And why are you going to East Harbor Grouping, by the way, if itís something you care to talk about?î
ìYouíll laugh, perhaps, but I have just found out that there exist such things as Eekahs.î
ìEekahs? Yes, I know.î The Administrator pointed a finger. ìcreatures from across the seal Right?î
ìRight! But thatís not all. Iíve come from the Library. Iíve seen trimensional reproductions, Lahr, and theyíre Primate Primeval, or almost. Theyíre primates, anyway, intelligent primates. Theyíve got small eyes, Hat noses, and completely different jawbones-but theyíre at least second cousins. Iíve got to see them, Lahr.î
The Administrator shrugged. He felt no interest in the matter himself. ìWhy? I ask out of ignorance, Raph. Does it matter, your seeing them?î
ìMatter?î Raph was obviously appalled at the question. ìDonít you know whatís been going on these last years? Have you read my archaeology book?î
ìNo,î said the Administrator, definitely, ìI wouldnít read it to save myself a turn at Garbage Disposal.î
Raph said: ìWhich probably proves you more suited to Garbage Disposal than archaeology. But never mind. Iíve been fighting single-handed for nearly ten years in favor of my theory that Primate Primeval was an intelligent creature with a developed civilization. I have nothing on my side so far but logical necessity, which is the last thing most archaeologists will accept. They want something solid. They want the remains of a Grouping, or artifacts, structures, books-get it. All I can give them is a skeleton with a huge brain-pan. Stars above, Lahr, what do they expect to survive in ten million years? Metal dies. Paper dies. Film dies.
ìOnly stone lasts, Lahr. And bone thatís turned to stone. Iíve got that. A skull with room for a brain. And stone, too, old sharpened knives. Ground flints.î
ìWell. ì said Lahr, ìthere are your artifacts.î
ìThose are called eoliths, dawn stones. They wonít accept them. They call them natural products, fortuitously shaped by erosion into the shapes they have, the idiots.î
Then he grinned with a scientific ferocity: ìBut if the Eekahs are intelligent primates, Iíve practically proven my case.î
Raph had traveled before, but never eastward, and the decline of agriculture on the road impressed him. In early history, the Gurrow Groupings had been entirely unspecialized. Each had been self-sufficient, and trade was a gesture of friendliness rather than a matter of necessity.
And so it was still in most Groupings. His own Grouping, the Red River, was perhaps typical. Some five hundred miles inland, set in lush farm land, agriculture remained centric. The river yielded some fish and there was a well-developed dairy industry. In fact, it was food exports that provided cause for the healthy state of the store of Common Units.
As they traveled eastward, however, the Groupings through which they passed paid less and less mind to the shallowing soil and more and more to the smoking factory structures.
In the East Harbor Grouping, Raph found a trading center which depended for its prosperity primarily upon ships. It was a more populous Grouping than the average, more densely packed, with houses, on occasion, within a hundred yards of each other.
Raph felt an uncomfortable prickling at the thought of living in such close quarters. The docks were even worse, with Gurrows engaged at the huge Community Jobs of loading and unloading.
The Administrator of this East Harbor Grouping was a young man, new at his job, overwhelmed with the joy of his work, and beside himself with the pleasure of welcoming a distinguished stranger.
Raph sat through an excellent meal, and was treated to a long discourse as to the exact derivation of each dish. To his provincial ears, beef from the Prairie Grouping, potatoes from the Northeast Woods Grouping, coffee from the Isthmus Grouping, wine from the Pacific Grouping, and fruit from the Central Lakes Grouping were something strange and wonderful.
Over the cigars-South Island Grouping-he brought up the subject of the Eekahs. The East Harbor Administrator grew solemn and a little uneasy.
ìThe man you want to see is Lernin. Heíll be glad to help you all he can. You say you know something of these Eekahs?î
ìI say I would like to know something. They resemble an extinct species of animal I am familiar with.î
ìThen that is your field of interest. I see.î
ìPerhaps you can tell me some of the details of their arrival, Administrator,î suggested Raph, politely.
ìI was not Administrator at the time, friend, so that I lack firsthand information, but the records are plain. This group of Eekahs that arrived in their flying-machineÖyouíve heard about these aeronautical devices?î
ìYes, yes.î
ìYes. WellÖapparently they were fugitives.î
ìSo I have heard. Yet they claim not to be criminals. Isnít that so?î
ìYes. Queer, isnít it? They admitted that they had been condemned-this was after long and skillful questioning, once we had learned their language-but denied that they were evildoers. Apparently, they had disagreed with their Administrator on principles of policy.î
Raph nodded his head knowingly: ì Ah, and refused to abide by the common decision. Is that it?î
ìMore confusing than that. They insist there was no common decision. They claim that the Administrator decided on policy of his own accord.î
ìAnd was not replaced?î
ìApparently those who believe he should are considered criminals -as these were.î
There was a frank pause of disbelief. Then Raph said: ìDoes that sound reasonable to you?î
ìNo, I merely relay to you their words. Of course, the Eekah language is quite a barrier. Some of the sounds canít be pronounced: words have different meanings according to position in the sentence and according to tiny differences in inflection. And it happens often that Eekah words even when best translated are a complete puzzle.î
ìThey must have been surprised to find Gurrows here,î suggested Raph, ìif they are members of a different genus.î
ìSurprised!î The Administratorís voice sank: ìIíll say they were surprised. Now, this information has not been generally published for obvious reasons, so I hope you remember that itís confidential. These Eekahs killed five Gurrows before they could be disarmed. They had an instrument that expelled metal pellets at high speed by means of a controlled explosive chemical reaction. We have duplicated it since. Naturally, under the circumstances, we are not branding them criminals, for it is reasonable to assume that they did not realize we were intelligent beings. Apparently,î and the Administrator smiled ruefully, ìwe resemble certain animals in their world. Or so they say.î
But Raph was galvanized into a sudden enthusiasm: ìStars above! They said that, did they? Did they go into details? What kind of animals?î
The Administrator was taken back: ìWell, I donít know. They give names in their language. What meaning has that? They called us giant ëbears.í ì
ìGiant what?î
ìBears. I havenít the slightest idea what they are, except presumably that they look like us. I know of no such in America.î
ìBears. Bears.î Raph stumbled over the word. ìThatís interesting. Itís more than interesting. Itís stupendous. Do you know, Administrator, that there is a great dispute among us as to the ancestry of Gurrows? Living animals related to Gurrow sapiens would be of immense importance.î Raph rubbed his huge hands with pleasure.
The Administrator was pleased at the sensation he had caused. He said: ìAnd a puzzling thing in addition is that they call themselves by two names.î
ìTwo names?î
ìYes. No one knows the distinction yet, no matter how much the Eekahs explain it to us, except that one is a more general name, and one a more specific. The basis of the difference escapes us.î
ìI see. Which is ëEekahë?î
ìThat is the specific one. The general one isî-the Administrator stumbled slowly over the harsh syllables-îChim-pan-zee. There, thatís it. There are a group called Eekahs and there are other groups with other names. But they are all called ChimÖwhat I said before.î
The Administrator sought through his mind for other juicy items of miscellany with which he was acquainted, but Raph interrupted him.
ìMay I see Lernin tomorrow?î
ìOf course.î
ìThen I shall do so. Thank you for your courtesy, Administrator.î
Lernin was a slight individual. It is doubtful if he weighed more than two hundred and fifty. There was also an imperfection in his walk, a slight lameness. But neither of these facts made much of an impression on Raph once the conversation had begun, for Lernin was a thinker who could impose his vigor upon others.
It was Raph whose eagerness dominated the first half of the conversation, and Lerninís comments were as luminous and as brief as lightning flashes. And then, there was a sudden whirl of the center of gravity, and Lernin took over.
ìYou will excuse me, learned friend,î Lernin said with a characteristic stiffness that he could make so amiable, ìif I find your problem unimportant. No, noî-he lifted a long-fingered hand-înot, in the uncomplicated talk of the times, merely unimportant to myself because my interest lies elsewhere, but unimportant to the Grouping of all the Groupings-to every single Gurrow from end to end of the world.î
The concept was staggering. For a moment, Raph was offended; offended deep in his sense of individuality. It showed in his face.
Lernin added quickly: ìIt may sound impolite, crude, uncivilized. But I must explain. I must explain because you are primarily a social scientist and will understand-perhaps better than we ourselves.î
ìMy life-interest,î said Raph angrily, ìis important to myself. I cannot assume those of others in preference.î
ìWhat I talk about should be the life-interest of all-if only because it may be the means of saving the lives of all of us.î
Raph was beginning to suspect all sorts of things from a queer form of joking to the unbalance of mind that sometimes came with age. Yet Lernin was not old.
Lernin said, with an impressive fervor: ìThe Eekahs of the other world are a danger to us, for they are not friendly to us.î
And Raph replied naturally: ìHow do you know?î
ìNo one other than myself, my friend, has lived more closely with these Eekahs who have arrived here, and I find them people with minds of emotional content strange to us. I have collected queer facts which we find difficult to interpret, but which point, at any rate, in disquieting directions.
ìIíll list a few: Eekahs in organized groups kill one another periodically for obscure reasons. Eekahs find it impossible to live in manner other than those of ants-that is, in huge conglomerate societies-yet find it impossible to allow for the presence of one another. Or, to use the terminology of the social scientists, they are gregarious without being social, just as we Gurrows are social without being gregarious. They have elaborate codes of behavior, which, we are told, are taught to the young, but which are disobeyed in universal practice, for reasons obscure to us. Et cetera. Et cetera. Et cetera.î
ìI am an archaeologist,î said Raph, stiffly. ìThese Eekahs are of interest to me biologically only. If the curvature of the thigh bone is known to me, I care little for the curvature of their cultural processes. If I can follow the shape of the skull, it is immaterial to me that the shape of their ethics is mysterious.î
ìYou donít think that their insanities may affect us here?î
ìWe are six thousand miles apart, or more, along either ocean,î said Raph. ëWe have our world. They have theirs. There is no connection between us.î
ìNo connection,î mused Lernin, ìso others have said. No connection at all. Yet Eekahs have reached us, and others may follow. We are told that the other world is dominated by a few, who are in turn dominated by their queer need for security which they confuse with an Eekah word called ëpower,í which, apparently, means the prevailing of oneís own will over the sum of the will of the community. What if this ëpowerí should extend to us?î
Raph bent his mind to the task. The matter was utterly ridiculous. It seemed impossible to picture the strange concepts.
Lernin said: ìThese Eekahs say that their world and ours in the long past were closer together. They say that there is a well-known scientific hypothesis in their world of a continental drift. That may interest you, since otherwise you might find it difficult to reconcile the existence of fossils of Primate Primeval closely related to living Eekahs six thousand miles away.î
And the mists cleared from the archaeologistís brain as he glanced up with a live interest untroubled by insanities: ì Ah, you should have said this sooner.î
ìI say it now as an example of what you may achieve for yourself by joining us and helping us. There is another thing. These Eekahs are physical scientists, like ourselves here in East Harbor, but with a difference dictated by their own cultural pattern. Since they live in hives, they think in hives, and their science is the result of an ant-society. Individually, they are slow and unimaginative; collectively, each supplies a crumb different from that supplied by his fellow-so that a vast structure is erected quickly. Here the individual is infinitely brighter, but he works alone. You, for instance, know nothing of chemistry, I imagine.î
ìA few of the fundamentals, but nothing else,î admitted Raph. ìI leave that, naturally, to the chemist.î
ìYes, naturally. But I am a chemist. Yet these Eekahs, though my mental inferiors, and no chemists in their own world, know more chemistry than I. For instance, did you know that there exist elements that spontaneously disintegrate?î
ìImpossible,î exploded Raph. ìElements are eternal, changeless-î
Lernin laughed: ìSo you have been taught. So I have been taught. So I taught others. Yet the Eekahs are right, for in my laboratories I have checked them, and in every detail they are right. Uranium gives rise to a spontaneous radiation. Youíve heard of uranium, of course? And furthermore, I have detected radiations of energy beyond that produced by uranium which must be due to traces of elements unknown to us but described by the Eekahs. And these missing elements fit well into the so-called Periodic Tables some chemists have tried to foist upon the science. Though I do wrong to use the word ëfoistí now.î
ìWell,î said Raph, ìwhy do you tell me this? Does this, too, help me in my problem?î
ìPerhaps,î said Lernin, ironically, ìyou will yet find it a royal bribe. You see, the energy production of uranium is absolutely constant. No known outward change in environment can affect it-and as a result of the loss in energy, uranium slowly turns to lead at an absolutely constant rate. A group of our men is even now using this fact as a basis for a method of determining the age of the earth. You see, to determine the age of a stratum of rock in the earth, then, it is but necessary to discover a region in it containing a trace of uranium-a widely spread element-and to determine about it the quantity of lead-and I might here add that the lead produced from uranium differs from ordinary lead and can be easily characterized-and it is then simple to determine the length of time in which that stratum has been solid. And of course, if a fossil is found in that stratum, it is of the same age, am I not correct?î
ìStars above,î and Raph rose to his feet in a tremble, ìyou do not deceive me? It is really possible to do this?î
ìIt is possible. It is even easy. I tell you that our great defense, even at this late date, is co-operation in science. We are a group now of many, my friend, from many Groupings, and we want you among us. If you join us, it would be a simple matter to extend our earthage project to such regions as you may indicate-regions rich in fossils. What do you say?î
ìI will help you.î
It is doubtful if the Gurrow Groupings had ever before seen a community venture of such breadth as now took place. East Harbor Grouping, as has been remarked, was a shipping center, and certainly a trans-Atlantic vessel was not beyond the capacity of a Grouping that traded along the full lengths of both coasts of the Americas. What was unusual was the vastness of the co-operation of Gurrows from many Groupings, Gurrows of many interests.
Not that they were all happy.
Raph, for instance, on the particular morning that now concerns us, six months from the date of his first arrival in East Harbor, was searching anxiously for Lernin.
Lernin, for his part, was searching for nothing but greater speed.
They met on the docks, where Lernin, biting the end off a cigar and leading the way to a region where smoking was permitted. said: ìAnd you, my friend, seem concerned. Not. certainly, about the progress of our ocean liner?î
ìI am concerned,î said Raph, gravely, ìabout the reports I have received of the expedition testing the age of the rocks.î
ìOh-And you are unhappy about it?î
ìUnhappy!î exploded Raph. ìHave you seen them?î
ìI have received a copy. I have looked at it. I have even read parts of it. But I have had little time and most of it bounced off. Will you please enlighten me?î
ìCertainly. In the last several months, three of the regions I have indicated as being fossiliferous have been tested. The first region was in the area of East Harbor Grouping itself. Another was in the Pacific Bay Grouping, and a third in the Central Lakes Grouping. I purposely asked that those be done first because they are the richest areas and because they are widely separated. Do you know, for instance, what age they tell me the rocks upon which we stand are?î
ìTwo billion years, I think, is the oldest figure I noticed.î
ìAnd thatís the figure for the oldest rocks-the basic igneous stratum of basalt. The upper strata, however-the recent sedimentary layers containing dozens of fossils of Primate Primeval-how old do you think these are supposed to be? Five-hundred-trillion-years! How is that? Do you understand?î
ìTrillion?î Lernin squinted upwards and shook his head. ìThatís strange.î
ìIíll add to it. The Pacific Coast Grouping is one hundred trillion years old-so I am told-and Central Lakes almost eighty trillion years old.î
Lernin said: ìAnd the other measurements? The ones that did not involve your strata?î
ìThat is the most peculiar thing of all. Most of the chosen investigations were carried on in strata that were not particularly fossiliferous. They had their own criteria of choice based on geological reasoning-and they got consistent results-one million to two billion years depending upon the depth and geological history of the particular region tested. Only my areas give these strange and impossible vagaries.î
And Lernin said, ìBut what do the geologists say about all this? Call there be some error?î
ìUndoubtedly. But they have fifty decent, reasonable measurements. For themselves, they have proved the method and are happy. There are three anomalies, to be sure, but they view them with equanimity as involving some unknown factors. I donít see it that way. These three measurements mean everything.î Raph interrupted himself fiercely: ìHow sure are you that radioactivity is an absolute constant?î
ìSure? Can one ever be sure? Nothing we know of so far affects it, and such is likewise the definite testimony of our Eekahs. Besides, my friend, if you are implying that radioactivity was more extensive in the past than in the present, why only in your fossil regions? Why not everywhere?î
ìWhy, indeed? Itís another aspect of a problem which is growing more important daily. Consider. We have regions which show a past of abnormal radioactivity. We have regions which show abnormal fossil frequencies. Why should these regions coincide, Lernin?î
ìOne obvious answer suggests itself, my friend. If your Primate Primeval existed at a time when certain regions were highly radioactive, certain individuals would wander into them and die. Radioactive radiation is deadly in excess, of course. Radioactivity and fossils, there you areÖ
ìWhy not other creatures,î demanded Raph. ìOnly Primate Primeval occurs in excess, and he was intelligent. He would not be trapped by dangerous radiation.î
ìPerhaps he was not intelligent. That is, after all, only your theory and not a proven fact.î
ìCertainly, then, he was more intelligent than his small-brained contemporariesÖ
ìPerhaps not even that. You romanticize too much.î
ìPerhaps I do.î Raph spoke in half a whisper. ìIt seems to me that I can conjure up visions of a great civilization of a million years back-or more. A great power; a great intelligence-that has vanished completely, except for the tiny whispers of ossified bones which retain that huge cavity in which a brain once existed, and a bony five-fingered hand curving into slender signs of manipulative skill-with an opposing thumb. They must have been intelligent.î
ìThen, what killed them?î Lernin shrugged: ìSeveral million species of living things have survived. ì
Raph looked up, half in anger: ìI cannot accompany your group, Lernin, on a Voluntary basis. To go to the other world would be useful, yes, if I could engage in my own studies. For your purposes, it can be only a Community Job to me. I cannot give my heart to it.î
But Lerninís jaw was set: ìThat arrangement would not be fair. There are many of us, my friend, who are sacrificing our own interests. If we all placed them first and investigated the other world in terms of our own particular provincialisms only, our great purpose would be destroyed. My friend, there is not one of our men that we can spare. We must all work as if our lives depended on our instant solution of the Eekah problem, which, believe me, it does.î
Raphís jaws twisted in distaste. ìOn your side, you have a vague apprehension of these weak, stupid little creatures. On my side I have a definite problem of great intellectual attraction to myself. And between the two I can see no connection-no possible connection at all.î
ìNor can I. But listen to me a moment. A small group of our most trusted men returned last week from a visit to the other world. It was not official, as ours will be. It made no contacts. It was a frank piece of espionage, which I am telling you about now. I ask your discretion on the matter.î
ìNaturally.î
ìOur men possessed themselves of Eekah event-sheets.î
ìPardon me?î
ìIt is a created name to describe the objects. Printed records are issued daily in the various centers of Eekah population of events and occurrences of the day, and what passes for literary efforts as well.î
Raph was momentarily interested: ìIt strikes me as an excellent idea.î
ìYes, in its essence. The Eekah notion of interesting events, however, appears to consist entirely of antisocial events. However, leave that be. My point is that the existence of the Americas is well-known there these days-and it is universally spoken of as a ënew land of opportunity.í The various divisions of Eekahs eye it with a universal desire. The Eekahs are many, they are crowded, their economy is irrational. They want new land, and that is what this is to them-new and empty land.î
ìNot empty,î pointed out Raph, mildly.
ìEmpty to them,î insisted Lernin terribly. ìThat is the vast danger. Lands occupied by Gurrows are to them empty and they mean to take it, all the more so since they have often enough striven to take the lands of one another.î
Raph shrugged: ìEven so, they-î
ìYes. They are weak and stupid. You said that, and so they are. But only singly. They will unite for a purpose. To be sure, they will fall apart when the purpose is done-but momentarily they will join and become strong, which we perhaps cannot do, witness yourself. And their weapons of war have been keened in the fire of conflict. Their flying machines, for instance, are superb war weapons.î
ìBut we have duplicated it-î
ìIn quantity? We have also duplicated their chemical explosives, but only in the laboratory, and their firing tubes and armored vehicles, but only in experimental plants. And yet there is more-something developed within the last five years, for our own Eekahs know nothing about it.î
ìAnd what is that?î
ìWe donít know. Their event-sheets speak of it-the names applied to it mean nothing to us-but the context implies the terror of it, even on the part of these kill-mad Eekahs. There seems no evidence that it has been used, or that all the Eekah groups have it-but it is used as a supreme threat. It will perhaps be clearer to you when all the evidence is presented once our voyage is under way.î
ìBut what is it? You talk of it as if it were a bogey.î
ìWhy, they talk of it as if it were a bogey. And what could be a bogey to an Eekah? That is the most frightening aspect of it. So far, we know only that it involves the bombardment of an element they call plutonium-of which we have never heard and of which our own Eekahs have never heard either-by objects called neutrons, which our Eekahs say are subatomic particles without charge, which seems to us completely ridiculous.î
ìAnd that is all?î
ìAll. Will you suspend judgment till we show you the sheets?î
Raph nodded reluctantly: ìVery well.î
Raphís leaden thoughts revolved in their worn groove as he stood there alone.
Eekahs and Primate Primeval. A living creature of erratic habits and a dead creature that must have aspired to heights. A sordid present of explosives and neutron bombardments and a glorious, mysterious past
No connection! No connection!



***



By June 1947 I had already been working on my Ph.D. research with near-total concentration (I was no longer working in the candy store; my younger brother, Stanley, had taken over) for nearly a year. I was in the homestretch and beginning to think forward to writing my Ph.D. dissertation. I rather dreaded that, since the obligatory style of dissertations is turgid in the extreme, and I had by now spent nine years trying to write well and was afraid I simply might not be able to write badly enough to qualify for my degree.
The experiments I was doing at the time required me, periodically, to dissolve a compound called catechol in water. The catechol existed in fine, feathery, fluffy needles that dissolved very readily in water. In fact, when I sprinkled catechol into the beaker of water, the individual needles dissolved as soon as they snuck the water surface. Idly, it occurred to me that if the catechol were any more soluble than it was, it would dissolve before it snuck the water surface.
Naturally, I thought at once that this notion might be the basis for an amusing story. It occurred to me, however, that instead of writing an actual story based on the idea, I might write up a fake research paper on the subject and get a little practice in turgid writing.
I did the job on June 8, 1947, even giving it the kind of long-winded title that research papers so often have-îThe Endochronic Properties of Resublimated Thiotimolineî-and added tables, graphs, and fake references to non-existent journals.
I was not at all sure that ìThiotimolineî (no use trying to quote the entire name every time) was publishable. Astounding, however, ran serious articles on scientific subjects of particular interest to science fiction readers and I thought it just possible Campbell might be interested in a gag article that would be on the borders of science fiction.
I brought it in to him on the tenth, and he took it almost at once.








The Endochronic Properties of Resublimated Thiotimoline


The correlation of the structure of organic molecules with their various properties, physical and chemical, has in recent years afforded much insight into the mechanism of organic reactions, notably in the theories of resonance and mesomer-ism as developed in the last decade. The solubilities of organic compounds in various solvents has become of particular interest in this connection through the recent discovery of the endochronic nature of thiotimoline.
It has been long known that the solubility of organic compounds in polar solvents such as water is enhanced by the presence upon the hydrocarbon nucleus of hydrophilic - i.e., water-loving - groups, such as the hydroxy (-OH), amino (-NH2), or sulfonic acid (SO3H) groups. Where the physical characteristics of two given compounds - particularly the degree of subdivision of the material - are equal, then the time of solution - expressed in seconds per gram of material per milli-liter of solvent - decreases with the number of hydrophilic groups present. Catechol, for instance, with two hydroxy groups on the benzene nucleus, dissolves considerably more quickly than does phenol, with only one hydroxy group on the nucleus. Feinschreiber and Hravlek in their studies on the problem have contended that with increasing hydrophilism, the time of solution approaches zero. That this analysis is not entirely correct was shown when it was discovered that the compound thiotimoline will dissolve in water - in the proportions of 1 gm./ml. - in minus 1.12 seconds. That is, it will dissolve before the water is added.
Previous communications from these laboratories indicated thiotimoline to contain at least fourteen hydroxy groups, two amino groups and one sulfonic acid group. The presence of a nitro group (-NO2) in addition has not yet been confirmed, and no evidence as yet exists as to the nature of the hydrocarbon nucleus, though an at least partly aromatic structure seems certain of solution of thiotimoline quantitatively met with considerable difficulty because of the very negative nature of the value. The fact that the chemical dissolved prior to the addition of the water made the attempt natural to withdraw the water after solution and before addition. This, fortunately for the law of Conservation of Mass-Energy, never succeeded, since solution never took place unless the water was eventually added. The question is, of course, instantly raised as to how the thiotimoline can 'know' in advance whether the water will ultimately be added or not. Though this is not properly within our province as physical chemists, much recent material has been published within the last year upon the psychological and philosophical problems thereby posed.
Nevertheless, the chemical difficulties involved rest in the fact that the time of solution varies enormously with the exact mental state of the experimenter. A period of even slight hesitation in adding the water reduces the negative time of solution, not infrequently wiping it out below the limits of detection. To avoid this, a mechanical device has been constructed, the essential design of which has already been reported in a previous communication.6 This device, termed the endochronometer, consists of a cell 2 cubic centimeters in size into which a desired weight of thiotimoline is placed, making certain that a small hollow extension at the bottom of the solution cell - 1 millimeter in internal diameter - is filled. To the cell is attached an automatic pressure micro-pipette containing a specific volume of the solvent concerned. Five seconds after the circuit is closed, this solvent is automatically delivered into the cell containing the thiotimoline. During the time of action, a ray of light is focused upon the small cell-extension described above, and at the instant of solution, the transmission of this light will no longer be impeded by the presence of solid thiotimoline. Both the instant of solution - at which time the transmission of light is recorded by a photoelectric device - and the instant of solvent addition can be determined with an accuracy of better than 0.01 %. If the first value is subtracted from the second, the time of solution (T) can be determined.
The entire process is conducted in a thermostat maintained at 25.00∞ C. - to an accuracy of 0.01 ∞ C.
Thiotimoline Purity - The extreme sensitivity of this method highlights the deviations resulting from trifling impurities present in thiotimoline. (Since no method of laboratory synthesis of the substance has been devised, it may be practically obtained only through tedious isolation from its natural source, the bark of the shrub Rosacea Karlsbadensis rugo.) Great efforts were therefore made to purify the material through repeated recrystallizations from conductivity water - twice redistilled in an all-tin apparatus - and through final sublimations. A comparison of the solution times (T) at various stages of the purification process is shown in Table I.



Table I



Averaee'T'
Purification stage (12 obser-'T' extremes % error
vations)


As isolated  -0.72 -0.25; -1.0134.1
First recrystallization -0.95 -0.84; -1.099.8
Second recrystallization -1.05 -0.99; -1.104.0
Third recrystallization  -1.11 -1.08; -1.131.8
Fourth recrystallization-1.12 -1.10; -1.13 1.7
First resublimation -1.12-1.11; -1.13 0.9
Second resublimation -1.122-1.12; -1.13 0.7


It is obvious from Table I that for truly quantitative significance, thiotimoline purified as described must be used. After the second resublimation, for instance, the error involved in an even dozen determinations is less than 0.7%, with the extreme values being -1.119 seconds and -1.126 seconds.
In all experiments described subsequently in this study, thiotimoline so purified has been used.
Time of Solution and Volume of Solvent - As would seem reasonable, experiments have shown that increasing the volume of solvent enables the thiotimoline to dissolve more quickly - i.e., with an increasingly negative time of solution. From Figure 1, however, we can see that this increase in endo-chronic properties levels off rapidly after a volume of solvent of approximately 1.25 ml. This interesting plateau effect has appeared with varying volume of solvent for all varieties of solvents used in these laboratories, just as in all cases the time of solution approaches zero with decreasing volume of solvent.
Time of Solution and Concentration of a Given Ion - In Figure 2, the results are given of the effect of the time of solution (T) of varying the volume of solvent, where the solvent consists of varying concentrations of sodium chloride solution. It can be seen that, although in each case the volume at which this plateau is reached differs markedly with the concentration, the heights of the plateau are constant (i.e. -1.13). The volume at which it is reached, hereinafter termed the Plateau Volume (PV), decreases with decreasing concentration of sodium chloride, approaching the PV for water as the NaCl concentration approaches zero. It is, therefore, obvious that a sodium chloride solution of unknown concentration can be quite accurately characterized by the, determination of its PV, where other salts are absent.






Figure 1







Figure 2







Figure 3



This usefulness of PV extends to other ions as well. Figure 3 gives the endochronic curves for 0.001 molar solutions of sodium chloride, sodium bromide and potassium chloride. Here, the PV in each case is equal within the limits of experimental error - since the concentrations in each case are equal - but the Plateau Heights (PH) are different.
A tentative conclusion that might be reached from this experimental data is that the PH is characteristic of the nature of the ions present in solution, whereas the PV is characteristic of the concentration of these ions. Table II gives the values of Plateau Height and Plateau Volume for a wide variety of salts in equal concentrations, when present alone.
The most interesting variation to be noted in Table II is that of the PV with the valence type of the salt present. In the case of salts containing pairs of singly-charged ions - i.e., sodium chloride, potassium chloride and sodium bromide - the PV is constant for all. This holds also for those salts containing one singly charged ion and one double charged ion - i.e. sodium sulphate, calcium chloride and magnesium chloride - where the PV, though equal among the three, varies markedly from those of the first set. The PV is, therefore, apparently a function of the ionic strength of the solution.
This effect also exists in connection with the Plateau Height, though less regularly. In the case of singly charged ions, such as in the first three salts listed in Table II, the PH is fairly close to that of water itself. It falls considerably where doubly charged ions, such as sulphate or calcium, are present. And when the triply charged phosphate ion or ferric ion is present, the value sinks to merely a quarter of its value in water.



Table II



Solvent (Salt solutions inPlateau Height  Plateau Volume
0- 001 M concentration)  (PH) seconds  (PV) milliliters


Water  -1.13 1.25
Sodium Chloride solution -1.13 1.37
Sodium Bromide Solution -1.10 1.37
Potassium Chloride solution  -1.08 1.37
Sodium Sulphate solution -0.721.59
Calcium Chloride solution -0.961.59
Magnesium Chloride solution -0.85  1.59
Calcium Sulphate solution -0.611.72
Sodium Phosphate solution  -0.32 1.97
Ferric Chloride solution  -0.291.99


Time of Solution and Mixtures of Ions - Experiments currently in progress in these laboratories are concerned with the extremely important question of the variation of these endo-chronic properties of thiotimoline in the presence of mixtures of ions. The state of our data at present does not warrant very general conclusions, but even our preliminary work gives hope of the further development of the endochronic methods of analysis. Thus, in Figure 4, we have the endochronic curve where a mixture of 0.001M Sodium Chloride and 0.001M Ferric Chloride solutions is the solvent. Here, two sharp changes in slope can be seen: the first at a solution time of -0.29, and the second at -1.13, these being the PH's characteristic of Fer ric Chloride and Sodium Chloride respectively - see Table II. The PH for a given salt would thus appear not to be affected by the presence of other salts.






Figure 4



This is definitely not the case, however, for the PV, and it is to a quantitative elucidation of the variation of PV with impurities in the solvent that our major efforts are now directed.
Summary - Investigations of the endochronic qualities of thiotimoline have shown that:
a - Careful purification of the material is necessary for obtaining quantitative results.
b - Increasing the volume of solvent results in increasing the negative time of solution to a constant value known as the Plateau Height (PH), at a volume of solvent known as the Plateau Volume (PV).
c - The value of the PH is characteristic of the nature of the ions present in the solvent, varying with the ionic strength of the solution and not varying with the addition of other ions.
d - The value of the PV is characteristic of the concentration of the ions present in the solvent, being constant for different ions in solution of equal ionic strength, but varying markedly with the admixtures of second varieties of ions.
As a result of all this, it is suggested that endochronic methods offer a means of rapid - 2 minutes or less - and accurate - within 0.1 % at least - analysis of inorganic, water-soluble materials.
Bibliography:
P. Krum and L. Eshkin. Journal of Chemical Solubilities, 27, 109-114 (1944), 'Concerning the Anomalous Solubility of Thiotimoline.'
E. J. Feinshreiber and Y. Hravlek. Journal of Chemical Solubilities, 22, 57-68 (1939), 'Solubility Speeds and Hydro-philic Groupings.'
P. Krum, I. Eshkin, and O. Nile. Annals of Synthetic Chemistry, 115, 1122-1145; 1208-1215 (1945), 'Structure of Thiotimoline, Parts I amp; II.'
G. H. Freudler, Journal of Psychochemistry, 2, 476-488 (1945), 'Initiative and Determination: Are They Influenced by Diet? - As tested by Thiotimoline solubility Experiments.'
E. Harley-Short, Philosophical Proceedings amp; Reviews, 15, 125-197 (1946), 'Determinism and Free-Will. The Application of Thiotimoline Solubility to Marxian Dialectic.'
P. Krum, 'Journal of Chemical Solubilities, 29, 818-819 (1946), 'A Device for the Quantitative Measurement of Thiotimoline Solubility Speed.'
A. Roundin, B. Lev, and Y. J. Prutt, Proceedings of the Society of Plant Chemistry, 80, 11-18 (1930), 'Natural Products isolated from shrubs of the genus Rosacea.'
Tiotimolin kak Ispitatel Marksciiskoy dilektiki B. Kreschia-tika, Journal Naouki i Sovetskoy Ticorii Vol. 11, No. 3.
Philossophia Neopredelennosti i Tiotimolin, Molvinski Pog-ost i Z. Brikalo. Mir i Kultura Vol. 2, No. 31.



***



When Campbell took the piece, I made one cautious stipulation. I knew it would appear in the spring and I knew that in the spring I would come up for my ìoral examinationsî-the last hurdle on the path to my Ph.D. I didnít want any austere member of the examining board to decide I was making fun of chemical research and to be sufficiently offended to vote against me on the grounds that I wasnít temperamentally suited to the high honor of the doctorate. -So I asked Campbell to run it under a pseudonym.
When the magazine with the article finally reached the newsstands, in mid-February 1948, I was appalled to discover that Campbell had utterly forgotten the matter of the pseudonym. The article appeared under my own name and I was scheduled to have my orals within three months. My nervousness was increased when, almost at once, copies of the magazine began circulating in the chemistry department.
On May 20, 1948, I had my orals. The examining board had seen the article. After I had been on the grill for an hour and twenty minutes, the last question (asked by Professor Ralph S. Halford) was, ìMr. Asimov, tell us something about the thermodynamic properties of the compound thiotimoline.î
I broke into hysterical laughter out of sheer relief, for it struck me instantly that they wouldnít play good-natured jokes with me (Professor Halford sounded jovial and everyone else was smiling) if they were going to Hunk me. I was led out, still laughing, and after a twenty-minute wait, the examiners emerged, shook my hand, and said, ìCongratulations, Dr. Asimov.î
My fellow students insisted on forcing five Manhattans down my throat that afternoon and, since I am a teetotaler under normal conditions and have no tolerance for alcohol, I was royally drunk at once. It took them three hours to sober me up.
After the official ceremonies, on June I, 1948, I was Isaac Asimov, Ph.D.
As it turned out, Campbellís non-use of a pseudonym (and I bet he did it deliberately, because he was smarter than I was) was a lucky break indeed. Not only did the examining board not take it amiss, but the article became, in a minor way, famous, and I with it.
Although ìThiotimolineî appeared in Astounding, as did all my stories of the time, it received circulation far outside the ordinary science fiction world. It passed from chemist to chemist, by way of the magazine itself, or by reprints in small trade journals, or by copies pirated and mimeographed, even by word of mouth. People who had never heard of me at all as a science fiction writer, heard of thiotimoline. It was the very first time my fame transcended the field.
Whatís more, although ìThiotimolineî was essentially a work of fantasy, the form was that of non-fiction. Viewed from that standpoint, ìThiotimolineî was the first piece of non-fiction I had ever published professionally-the harbinger of a vast amount to come.
But what amused me most was that a surprising number of readers actually took the article seriously. I was told that in the weeks after its appearance the librarians at the New York Public Library were driven out of their minds by hordes of eager youngsters who demanded to see copies of the fake journals I had used as pseudo references.
But back to the summer of 1947-
Over a period of five years I had sold fourteen stories, every one of them to Campbell. This didnít mean that he was the only editor in the field, at all. Almost all the magazines that had been published before the war still existed (although only Astounding was really doing well) and would have welcomed submissions from me. Had Campbell rejected any of the stories I had submitted to him, I would certainly have tried one of those other magazines.-but he didnít, so I didnít.
The magazine Startling Stories, in which I had published ìChristmas on Ganymedeî five and a half years before, published a forty thousand-word ìshort novelî in each issue. It wasnít easy to get a publishable story of that length every month though, especially since Startlingís rate was only half that of Astounding.
Sometimes it was necessary, therefore, for the editor of the magazine, who at that time was Sam Merwin, Jr., to canvass those authors known to be capable of turning out such a story. About the time I was doing ìThiotimoline,î Merwin approached me with a suggestion that I write a lead short novel.
 Startling, he explained, had always published stories with the accent on adventure, but, in imitation of Astoundingís success, he had persuaded the publisher to try the experiment of publishing stories with a heavier accent on science. Would I consider, then, doing a lead for Startling?
I was terribly flattered. Also, as I said earlier, I was nervous about having become a one-editor author and would have welcomed a chance to prove to myself that I could write beyond Campbellís protective shadow. I agreed, therefore, and a good part of the summer of 1947 (when I wasnít engaged in preparing my experimental data for the upcoming Ph.D. dissertation) was spent in preparing a story I called ìGrow Old with Me.î [This was inspired by Robert Browningís poem Rabbi Ben Ezra and was a misquotation-which shows you the level of my culture. The first line of the poem is ìGrow old along with me.î]
By August 3 I had completed first draft. On August 26, I had the first part of it in final copy and submitted that to Merwin. He approved. On September 23 the entire story was submitted and I had no doubt, whatever, of its acceptance. On October 15, 1947, however, Merwin told me that, alas, Startling had decided not to go for heavy science, after all, but for adventure, and that ìGrow Old with Meî would have to be completely rewritten with no guarantee of acceptance after that.
I suppose it is an indication of how things had advanced when I tell you it was the first time that I did not accept a request for revision philosophically. Quite otherwise! It had been five years and more since even Campbell had rejected one of my stories; how, then, dare a comparative nonentity like Merwin do so? Particularly since he had approached me for the story?
I made no effort to hide my annoyance. In fact, I seized the manuscript and stalked out of the office, and in an obvious rage. [Years afterward, as a result of the subsequent history of that story, Merwin took to apologizing for that rejection every time he met me-but he didnít have to, and I kept telling him so. He was editor, and he was completely within his rights to reject the story, and I was being pettily temperamental to be angry about it. I have made every effort, since, to avoid evident anger at any rejection, however unjustified it might seem at the time, and I think I have succeeded.] I submitted the story to Campbell, giving him a full account of events. -I have always made it a practice to tell any editor to whom I submit a story of any rejection it has previously received. There is no necessity to do this; it is not, as far as I know, an ethical requirement for a writer. I just do it, and it has not, again as far as I know, ever cost me an acceptance.
As it happened, Campbell rejected the story, but not, Iím sure, because it had been somewhere else first. He told me enough things wrong with the story to make me feel that perhaps Merwin had not been so arbitrary in rejecting it. I thrust the story in the drawer in disgust and thought no more about it for nearly two years.
The rejection came at a bad time. More and more, I was wrapped up in trying to complete my research, in writing my dissertation, and, most of all, in anxiously looking for a job. There wasnít much time to write, and the rejection had sufficiently disheartened and humiliated me so that I withdrew from writing for nearly a year. This was the third long withdrawal of my writing career, and, to this date, the last.
I did not find a job; my expected Ph.D. degree was no passport to affluence, after all. That was humiliating, too.
I accepted an offer from Professor Robert C. Elderfield to do a yearís postdoctoral research for him for $4,500, working on anti-malarial drugs. I accepted, though not with great enthusiasm, and started work for him on June 2, 1948, the day after I had officially gained my Ph.D.-At least it would give me another year to find a job.
By the next month, I had settled down sufficiently to consider writing a science fiction story, ìThe Red Queenís Race.î On July 12 it was finished and I submitted it to Campbell. It was accepted on the sixteenth and once again I was back in business.








The Red Queenís Race


Hereís a puzzle for you, if you like. Is it a crime to translate a chemistry textbook into Greek?
Or letís put it another way. If one of the countryís largest atomic power plants is completely ruined in an unauthorized experiment, is an admitted accessory to that act a criminal?
These problems only developed with time, of course. We started with the atomic power plant-drained. I really mean drained. I donít know exactly how large the fissionable power source was-but in two Hashing microseconds, it had all fissioned.
No explosion. No undue gamma ray density. It was merely that every moving part in the entire structure was fused. The entire main building was mildly hot. The atmosphere for two miles in every direction was gently warm. Just a dead, useless building which later on took a hundred million dollars to replace.
It happened about three in the morning, and they found Elmer Tywood alone in the central source chamber. The findings of twenty-four close-packed hours can be summarized quickly.
1. Elmer Tywood-Ph.D., Sc.D., Fellow of This and Honorary That, one-time youthful participant of the original Manhattan Project, and now full Professor of Nuclear Physics-was no interloper. He had a Class-a Pass-Unlimited. But no record could be found as to his purpose in being there just then. A table on casters contained equipment which had not been made on any recorded requisition. It, too, was a single fused mass-not quite too hot to touch.
2. Elmer Tywood was dead. He lay next to the table; his face congested, nearly black. No radiation effect. No external force of any sort. The doctor said apoplexy.
3. In Elmer Tywoodís office safe were found two puzzling items: i.e. twenty foolscap sheets of apparent mathematics, and a bound folio in a foreign language which turned out to be Greek, the subject matter, on translation, turning out to be chemistry.
The secrecy which poured over the whole mess was something so terrific as to make everything that touched it, dead. Itís the only word that can describe it. Twenty-seven men and women, all told, including the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of Science, and two or three others so top-notch that they were completely unknown to the public, entered the power plant during the period of investigation. All who had been in the plant that night, the physicist who had identified Tywood, the doctor who had examined him, were retired into virtual home arrest.
No newspaper ever got the story. No inside dopester got it. A few members of Congress got part of it.
And naturally sol Anyone or any group or any country that could suck all the available energy out of the equivalent of perhaps fifty to a hundred pounds of plutonium without exploding it, had Americaís industry and Americaís defense so snugly in the palm of the hand that the light and life of one hundred sixty million people could be turned off between yawns.
Was it Tywood? Or Tywood and others? Or just others, through Tywood?
And my job? I was decoy; or front man, if you like. Someone has to hang around the university and ask questions about Tywood. After all, he was missing. It could be amnesia, a hold-up, a kidnapping, a killing, a runaway, insanity, accident-I could busy myself with that for five years and collect black looks, and maybe divert attention. To be sure, it didnít work out that way.
But donít think I was in on the whole case at the start. I wasnít one of the twenty-seven men I mentioned a while back, though my boss was. But I knew a little-enough to get started.
Professor John Keyser was also in Physics. I didnít get to him right away. There was a good deal of routine to cover first in as conscientious a way as I could. Quite meaningless. Quite necessary. But I was in Keyserís office now.
Professorsí offices are distinctive. Nobody dusts them except some tired cleaning woman who hobbles in and out at eight in the morning, and the professor never notices the dust anyway. Lots of books without much arrangement. The ones close to the desk are used a lot-lectures are copied out of them. The ones out of reach are wherever a student put them back after borrowing them. Then there are professional journals that look cheap and are darned expensive, which are waiting about and which may some day be read. And plenty of paper on the desk; some of it scribbled on.
Keyser was an elderly man-one of Tywoodís generation. His nose was big and rather red, and he smoked a pipe. He had that easygoing and non-predatory look in his eyes that goes with an academic job-either because that kind of job attracts that kind of man or because that kind of job makes that kind of man.
I said: ìWhat kind of work is Professor Tywood doing?î
ìResearch physics.î
Answers like that bounce off me. Some years ago they used to get me mad. Now I just said: ìWe know that, professor. Itís the details Iím after.î
And he twinkled at me tolerantly: ìSurely the details canít help much unless youíre a research physicist yourself. Does it matter-under the circumstances?î
ìMaybe not. But heís gone. If anythingís happened to him in the way ofí-I gestured, and deliberately clinched-îfoul play, his work may have something to do with it-unless heís rich and the motive is money.î.
Keyser chuckled dryly: ìCollege professors are never rich. The commodity we peddle is but lightly considered, seeing how large the supply is.î
ì
I ignored that, too, because I know my looks are against me. Actually, I finished college with a ìvery goodî translated into Latin so that the college president could understand it, and never played in a football game in my life. But I look rather the reverse.
I said: ìThen weíre left with his work to consider.î
ìYou mean spies? International intrigue?î
ìWhy not? Itís happened before! After all, heís a nuclear physicist, isnít he?î
ìHe is. But so are others. So am I.î
ìAh, but perhaps he knows something you donít. ì
There was a stiffening to the jaw. When caught off-guard, professors can act just like people. He said, stiffly: ìAs I recall offhand, Tywood has published papers on the effect of liquid viscosity on the wings of the Rayleigh line, on higher-orbit field equations, and on spin-orbit coupling of two nucleons, but his main work is on quadrupole moments. I am quite competent in these matters.î
ìIs he working on quadrupole moments now?î I tried not to bat an eye, and I think I succeeded.
ìYes-in a way.î He almost sneered, ìHe may be getting to the experimental stage finally. Heís spent most of his life, it seems, working out the mathematical consequences of a special theory of his own.î
ìLike this,î and I tossed a sheet of foolscap at him.
That sheet was one of those in the safe in Tywoodís office. The chances, of course, were that the bundle meant nothing, if only because it was a professorís safe. That is, things are sometimes put in at the spur of the moment because the logical drawer was filled with unmarked exam papers. And, of course, nothing is ever taken out. We had found in that safe dusty little vials of yellowish crystals with scarcely legible labels, some mimeographed booklets dating back to World War II and marked ìRestricted,î a copy of an old college yearbook, and some correspondence concerning a possible position as Director of Research for American Electric, dated ten years back, and, of course, chemistry in Greek.
The foolscap was there, too. It was rolled up like a college diploma with a rubber band about it and had no label or descriptive title. Some twenty sheets were covered with ink marks, meticulous and small
I had one sheet of that foolscap. I donít think anyone man in the world had more than one sheet. And Iím sure that no man in the world but one knew that the loss of his particular sheet and of his particular life would be as nearly simultaneous as the government could make it.
So I tossed the sheet at Keyser, as if it were something Iíd found blowing about the campus.
He stared at it and then looked at the back side, which was blank. His eyes moved down from the top to the bottom, then jumped back to the top.
ìI donít know what this is about,î he said, and the words seemed sour to his own taste.
I didnít say anything. Just folded the paper and shoved it back into the inside jacket pocket.
Keyser added petulantly: ìItís a fallacy you laymen have that scientists can look at an equation and say,, Ah, yes-í and go on to write a book about it. Mathematics has no existence of its own. It is merely an arbitrary code devised to describe physical observations or philosophical concepts. Every man can adapt it to his own particular needs. For instance no one can look at a symbol and be sure of what it means. So far, science has used every letter in the alphabet, large, small and italic, each symbolizing many different things. They have used bold-faced letters, Gothic-type letters, Greek letters, both capital and small, subscripts, superscripts, asterisks, even Hebrew letters. Different scientists use different symbols for the same concept and the same symbol for different concepts. So if you show a disconnected page like this to any man, without information as to the subject being investigated or the particular symbology used, he could absolutely not make sense out of it.î
I interrupted: ìBut you said he was working on quadrupole moments. Does that make this sensible?î and I tapped the spot on my chest where the foolscap had been slowly scorching a hole in my jacket for two days.
ìI canít tell. I saw none of the standard relationships that Iíd expect to be involved. At least I recognized none. But I obviously canít commit myself.î
There was a short silence, then he said: ìIíll tell you. Why donít you check with his students?î
I lifted my eyebrows: ìYou mean in his classes?î
He seemed annoyed: ìNo, for Heavenís sake. His research students! His doctoral candidates! Theyíve been working with him. Theyíll know the details of that work better than I, or anyone in the faculty, could possibly know it.î
ìItís an idea,î I said, casually. It was, too. I donít know why, but I wouldnít have thought of it myself. I guess itís because itís only natural to think that any professor knows more than any student.
Keyser latched onto a lapel as I rose to leave. ì And, besides,î he said, ìI think youíre on the wrong track. This is in confidence, you understand, and I wouldnít say it except for the unusual circumstances, but Tywood is not thought of too highly in the profession. Oh, heís an adequate teacher, Iíll admit, but his research papers have never commanded respect. There has always been a tendency towards vague theorizing, unsupported by experimental evidence. That paper of yours is probably more of it. No one could possibly want toÖer, kidnap him because of it.î
ìIs that so? I see. Any ideas, yourself, as to why heís gone, or where heís gone?î
ìNothing concrete,î he said pursing his lips, ìbut everyone knows he is a sick man. He had a stroke two years ago that kept him out of classes for a semester. He never did get well. His left side was paralyzed for a while and he still limps. Another stroke would kill him. It could come any time.î
ìYou think heís dead, then?î
ìItís not impossible.î
ìBut whereís the body, then?î
ìWell, really-That is your job, I think.ì
It was, and I left.
I interviewed each one of Tywoodís four research students in a volume of chaos called a research laboratory. These student research laboratories usually have two hopefuls working therein, said two constituting a floating population, since every year or so they are alternately replaced.
Consequently, the laboratory has its equipment stack in tiers. On the laboratory benches is the equipment immediately being used, and in three or four of the handiest drawers are replacements or supplements which are likely to be used. In the farther drawers, in the shelves reaching up to the ceiling, in odd corners, are fading remnants of the past student generations-oddments never used and never discarded. It is claimed, in fact, that no research student ever knew all the contents of his laboratory.
All four of Tywoodís students were worried. But three were worried mainly by their own status. That is, by the possible effect the absence of Tywood might have on the status of their ìproblem.î I dismissed those three-who all have their degrees now, I hope-and called back the fourth.
He had the most haggard look of all, and had been least communicative-which I considered a hopeful sign.
He now sat stiffly in the straight-backed chair at the right of the desk, while I leaned back in a creaky old swivel-chair and pushed my hat off my forehead. His name was Edwin Howe and he did get his degree later on; I know that for sure, because heís a big wheel in the Department of Science now.
I said: ìYou do the same work the other boys do, I suppose?î
ìItís all nuclear work, in a way.î
ìBut itís not all exactly the same?î
He shook his head slowly. ìWe take different angles. You have to have something clear-cut, you know, or you wonít be able to publish. Weíve got to get our degrees.î
He said it exactly the way you or I might say, ìWeíve got to make a living.î At that, maybe itís the same thing for them.
I said: ìAll right. Whatís your angle?î
He said: ìI do the math. I mean, with Professor Tywood.î
ìWhat kind of math?î
And he smiled a little, getting the same sort of atmosphere about him that I had noticed in Professor Keyserís case that morning. A sort of, ìDo-you-really-think-I-can-explain-all-my-profound-thoughts-to-stupid-little-you?î sort of atmosphere.
All he said aloud, however, was: ìThat would be rather complicated to explain.î
ìIíll help you,î I said. ìIs that anything like it?î And I tossed the foolscap sheet at him.
He didnít give it any once-over. He just snatched it up and let out a thin wail: ìWhereíd you get this?î
ìFrom Tywoodís safe.î
ìDo you have the rest of it, too?î
ìItís safe,î I hedged.
He relaxed a little-just a little: ìYou didnít show it to anybody, did you?î
I showed it to Professor Keyser.î
Howe made an impolite sound with his lower lip and front teeth, ìThat jackass. What did he say?î
I turned the palms of my hands upward and Howe laughed. Then he said, in an offhand manner: ìWell, thatís the sort of stuff I do.î
ìAnd whatís it all about? Put it so I can understand it.î
There was distinct hesitation. He said: ìNow, look. This is confidential stuff. Even Popís other students donít know anything about it. I donít even think I know all about it. This isnít just a degree Iím after, you know. Itís Pop Tywoodís Nobel Prize, and itís going to be an Assistant Professorship for me at Cal Tech. This has got to be published before itís talked about.î
And I shook my head slowly and made my words very soft: ìNo, son. You have it twisted. Youíll have to talk about it before itís published, because Tywoodís gone and maybe heís dead and maybe he isnít. And if heís dead, maybe heís murdered. And when the department has a suspicion of murder, everybody talks. Now, it will look bad for you, kid, if you try to keep some secrets.î
It worked. I knew it would, because everyone reads murder mysteries and knows all the cliches. He jumped out of his chair and rattled the words off as if he had a script in front of him.
ìSurely,î he said, ìYou canít suspect me ofÖof anything like that. WhyÖwhy, my career-î
I shoved him back into his chair with the beginnings of a sweat on his forehead. I went into the next line: ìI donít suspect anybody of anything yet. And you wonít be in any trouble, if you talk, chum.î
He was ready to talk. ìNow this is all in strict confidence.î
Poor guy. He didnít know the meaning of the word ìstrict.î He was never out of eyeshot of an operator from that moment till the government decided to bury the whole case with the one final comment of ì?î Quote. Unquote. (Iím not kidding. To this day, the case is neither opened nor closed. Itís just ì?î)
He said, dubiously; ìYou know what time travel is, I suppose?î
Sure I knew what time travel was. My oldest kid is twelve and he listens to the afternoon video programs till he swells up visibly with the junk he absorbs at the ears and eyes.
ìWhat about time travel?î I said.
ìIn a sense, we can do it. Actually, itís only what you might call micro-temporal-translation -î
I almost lost my temper. In fact, I think I did. It seemed obvious that the squirt was trying to diddle me; and without subtlety. Iím used to having people think I look dumb; but not that dumb.
I said through the back of my throat: ìAre you going to tell me that Tywood is out somewhere in time-like Ace Rogers, the Lone Time Ranger?î (That was Juniorís favorite program-Ace Rogers was stopping Genghis Khan single-handed that week.)
But he looked as disgusted as I must have. ìNo,î he yelled. ìI donít know where Pop is. If youíd listen to me-I said micro-temporal-translation. Now, this isnít a video show and it isnít magic; this happens to be science. For instance, you know about matter-energy equivalence, I suppose.î
I nodded sourly. Everyone knows about that since Hiroshima in the last war but one.
ìAll right, then,î he went on, ìthatís good for a start. Now, if you take a brown mass of matter and apply temporal translation to it-you know, send it back in time-you are, in effect, creating matter at the point in time to which you are sending it. To do that, you must use an amount of energy equivalent to the amount of matter you have created. In other words, to send a gram-or, say, an ounce-of anything back in time, you have to disintegrate an ounce of matter completely, to furnish the energy required.î
ìHm-m-m,î I said, ìthatís to create the ounce of matter in the past. But arenít you destroying an ounce of matter by removing it from the present? Doesnít that create the equivalent amount of energy?î
And he looked just about as annoyed as a fellow sitting on a bumblebee that wasnít quite dead. Apparently laymen are never supposed to question scientists.
He said: ìI was trying to simplify it so you would understand it. Actually, itís more complicated. It would be very nice if we could use the energy of disappearance to cause it to appear, but that would be working in a circle, believe me. The requirements of entropy would forbid it. To put it more rigorously, the energy is required to overcome temporal inertia and it just works out so that the energy in ergs required to send back a mass, in grams, is equal to that mass times the square of the speed of light in centimeters per second. Which just happens to be the Einstein Mass-Energy Equivalence Equation. I can give you the mathematics, you know.î
ìI know,î I waxed some of that misplaced eagerness back. ìBut was all this worked out experimentally? Or is it just on paper?î
Obviously, the thing was to keep him talking.
He had that queer light in his eye that every research student gets, I am told, when he is asked to discuss his problem. Hell discuss it with anyone, even with a ìdumb flatfootî-which was convenient at the moment.
ìYou see,î he said like a man slipping you the inside dope on a shady business deal, ìwhat started the whole thing was this neutrino business. Theyíve been trying to find that neutrino since the late thirties and they havenít succeeded. Itís a subatomic particle which has no charge and has a mass much less than even an electron. Naturally, itís next to impossible to spot, and hasnít been spotted yet. But they keep looking because, without assuming that a neutrino exists, the energetics of some nuclear reactions canít be balanced. So Pop Tywood got the idea about twenty years ago that some energy was disappearing, in the form of matter, back into time. We got working on that-or he did-and Iím the first student heís ever had tackle it along with him.
ìObviously, we had to work with tiny amounts of material andÖ well, it was just a stroke of genius on Popís part to think of using traces of artificial radioactive isotopes. You could work with just a few micrograms of it, you know, by following its activity with counters. The variation of activity with time should follow a very definite and simple law which has never been altered by any laboratory condition known.
ìWell, weíd send a speck back fifteen minutes, say, and fifteen minutes before we did that-everything was arranged automatically, you see-the count jumped to nearly double what it should be, fell off normally, and then dropped sharply at the moment it was sent back below where it would have been normally. The material overlapped itself in time, you see, and for fifteen minutes we counted the doubled material-î
I interrupted: ìYou mean you had the same atoms existing in two places at the same time.î
ìYes,î he said, with mild surprise, ìwhy not? Thatís why we use so much energy-the equivalent of creating those atoms.î And then he rushed on, ìNow Iíll tell you what my particular job is. If you send back the material fifteen minutes, it is apparently sent back to the same spot relative to the Earth despite the fact that in fifteen minutes, the Earth moved sixteen thousand miles around the Sun, and the Sun itself moves more thousand miles and so on. But there are certain tiny discrepancies which Iíve analyzed and which turn out to be due, possibly, to two causes.
ìFirst, there is a frictional effect-if you can use such a term-so that matter does drift a little with respect to the Earth, depending on how far back in time it is sent, and on the nature of material. Then, too, some of the discrepancy can only be explained by the assumption that passage through time itself takes time.î
ìHowís that?î I said.
ìWhat I mean is that some of the radioactivity is evenly spread throughout the time of translation as if the material tested had been reacting during backward passage through time by a constant amount. My figures show that-well, if you were to be moved backward in time, you would age one day for every hundred years. Or, to put it another way, if you could watch a time dial which recorded the time outside a ëtime-machine,í your watch would move forward twenty-four hours while the time dial moved back a hundred years. Thatís a universal constant, I think, because the speed of light is a universal constant. Anyway, thatís my work.î
After a few minutes, in which I chewed all this, I asked: ìWhere did you get the energy needed for your experiments?î
ìThey ran out a special line from the power plant. Popís a big shot there, and swung the deal.î
ìHm-m-m. What was the heaviest amount of material you sent into the past?î
ìOhî-he sent his eyes upwards-îI think we shot back one hundredth of a milligram once. Thatís ten micrograms.î
ìEver try sending anything into the future?î
ìThat wonít work,î he put in quickly. ìImpossible. You canít change signs like that, because the energy required becomes more than infinite. Itís a one-way proposition.î
I looked hard at my fingernails: ìHow much material could you send back in time if you fissioned aboutÖoh, say, one hundred pounds of plutonium.î Things, I thought, were becoming, if anything, too obvious.
The answer came quickly: ìIn plutonium fission,î he said, ìnot more than one or two percent of the mass is converted into energy. Therefore, one hundred pounds of plutonium when completely used up would send a pound or two back into time.î
ìIs that all? But could you handle all that energy? I mean, a hundred pounds of plutonium can make quite an explosion.î
ìAll relative,î he said, a bit pompously. ìIf you took all that energy and let it loose a little at a time, you could handle it. If you released it all at once, but used it just as fast as you released it, you could still handle it. In sending back material through time, energy can be used much faster than it can possibly be released even through fission. Theoretically, anywayÖ
ìBut how do you get rid of it?î
ìItís spread through time, naturally. Of course, the minimum time through which material could be transferred would, therefore, depend on the mass of the material. Otherwise, youíre liable to have the energy density with time too high.î
ìAll right, kid,î I said. ìIím calling up headquarters, and theyíll send a man here to take you home. Youíll stay there a while.î
ìBut-What for?î
ìIt wonít be for long.î
It wasnít-and it was made up to him afterwards.
I spent the evening at Headquarters. We had a library there-a very special kind of library. The very morning after the explosion, two or three operators had drifted quietly into the chemistry and physics libraries of the University. Experts in their way. They located every article Tywood had ever published in any scientific journal and had snapped each page. Nothing was disturbed otherwise.
Other men went through magazine files and through book lists. It ended with a room at Headquarters that represented a complete Tywoodana. Nor was there a definite purpose in doing this. It merely represented part of the thoroughness with which a problem of this sort is met.
I went through that library. Not the scientific papers. I knew thereíd be nothing there that I wanted. But he had written a series of articles for a magazine twenty years back, and I read those. And I grabbed at every piece of private correspondence they had available.
After that, I just sat and thought-and got scared.
I got to bed about four in the morning and had nightmares.
But I was in the Bossí private office at nine in the morning just the same.
Heís a big man, the Boss, with iron-gray hair slicked down tight. He doesnít smoke, but he keeps a box of cigars on his desk and when he doesnít want to say anything for a few seconds, he picks one up, rolls it about a little, smells it, then sticks it right into the middle of his mouth and lights it in a very careful way. By that time, he either has something to say or doesnít have to say anything at all. Then he puts the cigar down and lets it bum to death.
He used up a box in about three weeks, and every Christmas, half his gift-wraps held boxes of cigars.
He wasnít reaching for any cigars now, though. He just folded his big fists together on the desk and looked up at me from under a creased forehead. ìWhatís boiling?î
I told him. Slowly, because micro-temporal-translation doesnít sit well with anybody, especially when you call it time travel, which I did. Itís a sign of how serious things were that he only asked me once if I were crazy.
Then I was finished and we stared at each other.
He said: ìAnd you think he tried to send something back in time-something weighing a pound or two-and blew an entire plant doing it?î
ìIt fits in,î I said.
I let him go for a while. He was thinking and I wanted him to keep on thinking. I wanted him, if possible, to think of the same thing I was thinking, so that I wouldnít have to tell him
Because I hated to have to tell him-
Because it was nuts, for, one thing. And too horrible, for another.
So I kept quiet and he kept on thinking and every once in a while some of his thoughts came to the surface.
After a while, he said: ìAssuming the student, Howe, to have told the truth-and youíd better check his notebooks, by the way, which I hope youíve impounded-ì
ìThe entire wing of that floor is out of bounds, sir. Edwards has the notebooks.î
He went on: ì All right. Assuming he told us all the truth he knows, why did Tywood jump from less than a milligram to a pound?î
His eyes came down and they were hard: ìNow youíre concentrating on the time-travel angle. To you, I gather, that is the crucial point, with the energy involved as incidental-purely incidental.î
ìYes, sir,î I said grimly. ìI think exactly that.î
ìHave you considered that you might be wrong? That you might have matters inverted?î
ìI donít quite get that.î
ìWell, look. You say youíve read up on Tywood. All right. He was one of that bunch of scientists after World War II that fought the atom bomb; wanted a world state-you know about that, donít you?î
I nodded.
ìHe had a guilt complex, ì the Boss said with energy. ìHeíd helped work out the bomb, and he couldnít sleep nights thinking of what heíd done. He lived with that fear for years. And even though the bomb wasnít used in World War III, can you imagine what every day of uncertainty must have meant to him? Can you imagine the shriveling horror in his soul as he waited for others to make the decision at every crucial moment till the final Compromise of Sixty-Five?
ìWe have a complete psychiatric analysis of Tywood and several others just like him, taken during the last war. Did you know that?î
ìNo, sir.î
ìItís true. We let up after Sixty-Five, of course, because with the establishment of world control of atomic power, the scrapping of the atomic bomb stockpile in all countries, and the establishment of research liaison among the various spheres of influence on the planet, most of the ethical conflict in the scientific mind was removed.
ìBut the findings at the time were serious. In 1964, Tywood had a morbid subconscious hatred for the very concept of atomic power. He began to make mistakes, serious ones. Eventually, we were forced to take him off research of any kind. And several others as well, even though things were pretty bad at the time. We had just lost India, if you remember.î
Considering that I was in India at the time, I remembered. But I still wasnít seeing his point.
ìNow, what,î he continued, ìif dregs of that attitude remained buried in Tywood to the very end? Donít you see that this time-travel is a double-edged sword? Why throw a pound of anything into the past, anyway? For the sake of proving a point? He had proved his case just as much when he sent back a fraction of a milligram. That was good enough for the Nobel Prize, I suppose.
ìBut there was one thing he could do with a pound of matter that he couldnít do with a milligram, and that was to drain a power plant. So that was what he must have been after. He had discovered a way of consuming inconceivable quantities of energy. By sending back eighty pounds of dirt, he could remove all the existing plutonium in the world, End atomic power for an indefinite period.î
I was completely unimpressed, but I tried not to make that too plain. I just said: ìDo you think he could possibly have thought he could get away with it more than once?î
ìThis is all based on the fact that he wasnít a normal man. How do I know what he could imagine he could do? Besides, there may be men behind him-with less science and more brains-who are quite ready to continue onwards from this point.î
ìHave any of these men been found yet? Any evidence of such men?î
A little wait, and his hand reached for the cigar box. He stared at the cigar and turned it end for end. Just a little wait more. I was patient.
Then he put it down decisively without lighting it. ì
ìNo,î he said.
He looked at me, and clear through me, and said: ìThen, you still donít go for that?î
I shrugged, ìWell-It doesnít sound right.î
ìDo you have a notion of your own?î
ìYes. But I canít bring myself to talk about it. If Iím wrong, Iím the wrongest man that ever was; but if Iím right, Iím the rightest.î
ìIíll listen,î he said, and he put his hand under the desk.
That was the pay-off. The room was armored, sound-proof, and radiation-proof to anything short of a nuclear explosion. And with that little signal showing on his secretaryís desk, the President of the United States couldnít have interrupted us.
I leaned back and said: ìChief, do you happen to remember how you met your wife? Was it a little thing?î
He must have thought it a non sequitur. What else could he have thought? But he was giving me my head now; having his own reasons, I suppose.
He just smiled and said: ìI sneezed and she turned around. It was at a street comer.î
ìWhat made you be on that street corner just then? What made her be? Do you remember just why you sneezed? Where you caught the cold? Or where the speck of dust came from? Imagine how many factors had to intersect in just the right place at just the right time for you to meet your wife.î
ìI suppose we would have met some other time, if not then?î
ìBut you canít know that. How do you know whom you didnít meet, because once when you might have turned around. you didnít; because once when you might have been late, you werenít. Your life forks at every instant, and you go down one of the forks almost at random, and so does everyone else. Start twenty years ago, and the forks diverge further and further with time.
ìYou sneezed, and met a girl, and not another. As a consequence, you made certain decisions, and so did the girl, and so did the girl you didnít meet, and the man who did meet her, and the people you all met thereafter. And your family, her family, their family-and your children.
ìBecause you sneezed twenty years ago, five people, or fifty, or five hundred, might be dead now who would have been alive, or might be alive who would have been dead. Move it two hundred years ago: two thousand years ago, and a sneeze-even by someone no history ever heard of-might have meant that no one now alive would have been aliveÖ
The Boss rubbed the back of his head: ìWidening ripples. I read a story once-î
ìSo did I. Itís not a new idea-but I want you to think about it for a while, because I want to read to you from an article by Professor Elmer Tywood in a magazine twenty years old. It was just before the last warÖ
I had copies of the film in my pocket and the white wall made a beautiful screen, which was what it was meant to do. The boss made a motion to turn about, but I waved him back.
ìNo, sir,î I said. ìI want to read this to you. And I want you to listen to it.î
He leaned back.
ìThe article,Ö I went on, is entitled: ëManís First Great Failure!í Remember, this was just before the war, when the bitter disappointment at the final failure of the United Nations was at its height. What I will read are some excerpts from the first part of the article. It goes like this:
ìíÖThat Man, with his technical perfection, has failed to solve the great sociological problems of today is only the second immense tragedy that has come to the race. The first, and perhaps the greater, was that, once, these same great sociological problems were solved; and yet these solutions were not permanent, because the technical perfection we have today did not then exist
ìëIt was a case of having bread without butter, or butter without bread. N ever both togetherÖ
ìëConsider the Hellenic world, from which our philosophy, our mathematics, our ethics, our art, our literature-our entire culture, in fact-stemÖIn the days of Pericles, Greece, like our own world in microcosm, was a surprisingly modem potpourri of conflicting ideologies and ways of life. But then Rome came, adopting the culture, but bestowing, and enforcing, peace. To be sure, the Pax Romana lasted only two hundred years, but no like period has existed sinceÖ
ìëWar was abolished. Nationalism did not exist. The Roman citizen was Empire-wide. Paul of Tarsus and Flavius Josephus were Roman citizens. Spaniards, North Africans, Illyrians assumed the purple. Slavery existed, but it was an indiscriminate slavery, imposed as a punishment, incurred as the price of economic failure, brought on by the fortunes of war. No man was a natural slave-because of the color of his skin or the place of his birth.
ìëReligious toleration was complete. If an exception was made early in the case of the Christians, it was because they refused to accept the principle of toleration; because they insisted that only they themselves knew truth-a principle abhorrent to the civilized RomanÖ
ìëWith all of Western culture under a single polis, with the cancer of religious and national particularism and exclusivism absent; with a high civilization in existence-why could not Man hold his gains?
ìëIt was because, technologically, ancient Hellenism remained backward. It was because without a machine civilization, the price of leisure-and hence civilization and culture-for the few, was slavery for the many. Because the civilization could not find the means to bring comfort and ease to all the population.
ìëTherefore, the depressed classes turned to the other world, and to religions which spurned the material benefits of this world-so that science was made impossible in any true sense for over a millennium. And further, as the initial impetus of Hellenism waned, the Empire lacked the technological powers to beat back the barbarians. In fact, it was not till after 1500 A.D. that war became sufficiently a function of the industrial resources of a nation to enable the settled people to defeat invading tribesmen and nomads with easeÖ
ìëImagine, then, if somehow the ancient Greeks had learned just a hint of modem chemistry and physics. Imagine if the growth of the Empire had been accompanied by the growth of science, technology and industry. Imagine an Empire in which machinery replaced slaves, in which all men had a decent share of the worldís goods, in which the legion became the armored column against which no barbarians could stand. Imagine an Empire which would therefore spread all over the world, without religious or national prejudices
ìí An Empire of all men-all brothers-eventually all freeÖ
ì ëIf history could be changed. If that first great failure could have been prevented-í ì
And I stopped at that point.
ìWell?î said the Boss.
ìWell,î I said, ìI think it isnít difficult to connect all that with the fact that Tywood blew an entire power plant in his anxiety to send something back to the past, while in his office safe we found sections of a chemistry textbook translated into Greek.î
His face changed, while he considered.
Then he said heavily: ìBut nothingís happened.î
ìI know. But then Iíve been told by Tywoodís student that it takes a day to move back a century in time. Assuming that ancient Greece was the target area, we have twenty centuries, hence twenty days.î
ìBut can it be stopped?î
ì I wouldnít know. Tywood might, but heís dead.î
The enormity of it all hit me at once, deeper than it had the night before-
All humanity was virtually under sentence of death. And while that was merely horrible abstraction, the fact that reduced it to a thoroughly unbearable reality was that I was, too. And my wife, and my kid.
Further, it was a death without precedence. A ceasing to exist, and no more. The passing of a breath. The vanishing of a dream. The drift into eternal non-space and non-time of a shadow. I would not be dead at all, in fact I would merely never have been born.
Or would I? Would I exist-my individuality-my ego-my soul, if you like? Another life? Other circumstances?
I thought none of that in words then. But if a cold knot in the stomach could ever speak under the circumstances, it would sound like that, I think.
The Boss moved in on my thoughts-hard.
ìThen, we have about two and a half weeks. No time to lose. Come on.î
I grinned with one side of my mouth: ìWhat do we do? Chase the book?î
ìNo,î he replied coldly, ìbut there are two courses of action we must follow. First, you may be wrong-altogether. All of this circumstantial reasoning may still represent a false lead, perhaps deliberately thrown before us, to cover up the real truth. That must be checked.
ìSecondly, you may be right-but there may be some way of stopping the book: other than chasing it in a time machine, I mean. If so, we must find out how.î
ìI would just like to say, sir, if this is a false lead, only a madman would consider it a believable one. So suppose Iím right, and suppose thereís no way of stopping it?î
ìThen, young fellow, Iím going to keep pretty busy for two and a half weeks, and Iíd advise you to do the same. The time will pass more quickly that way.î
Of course he was right.
ìWhere do we start?î I asked.
ìThe first thing we need is a list of all men and women on the government payroll under Tywood.î
ìWhy?î
ìReasoning. Your specialty, you know. Tywood doesnít know Greek, I think we can assume with fair safety, so someone else must have done the translating. It isnít likely that anyone would do a job like that for nothing, and it isnít likely that Tywood would payout of his personal funds-not on a professorís salary.î
ìHe might, ì I pointed out, ìhave been interested in more secrecy than a government payroll affords.î
ìWhy? Where was the danger? Is it a crime to translate a chemistry textbook into Greek? Who would ever deduce from that a plot such as youíve described?î
It took us half an hour to turn up the name of Mycroft James Boulder, listed as ìConsultant, ì and to find out that he was mentioned in the University Catalogue as Assistant Professor of Philosophy and to check by telephone that among his many accomplishments was a thorough knowledge of Attic Greek.
Which was a coincidence-because with the Boss reaching for his hat, the interoffice teletype clicked away and it turned out that Mycroft James Boulder was in the anteroom, at the end of a two-hour continuing insistence that he see the Boss.
The Boss put his hat back and opened his office door.
Professor Mycroft James Boulder was a gray man. His hair was gray and his eyes were gray. His suit was gray, too.
But most of all, his expression was gray; gray with a tension that seemed to twist at the lines in his thin face.
Boulder said, softly: ìIíve been trying for three days to get a hearing, sir, with a responsible man. I can get no higher than yourself.î
ìI may be high enough,î said the Boss. ìWhatís on your mind?î
ìIt is quite important that I be granted an interview with Professor Tywood.î
ìDo you know where he is?î
ìI am quite certain that he is in government custody.î
ìWhy?î
ìBecause I know that he was planning an experiment which would entail the breaking of security regulations. Events since, as nearly as I can make them out, flownaturally from the supposition that security regulations have indeed been broken. I can presume, then, that the experiment has at least been attempted. I must discover whether it has been successfully concluded.î
ìProfessor Boulder,î said the Boss, ìI believe you can read Greek.î
ìYes, I can,î -coolly.
ìAnd have translated chemical texts for Professor Tywood on government money.î
ìYes-as a legally employed consultant.î
ìYet such translation, under the circumstances, constitutes a crime, since it makes you an accessory to Tywoodís crime.î
ìYou can establish a connection?î
ìCanít you? Or havenít you heard of Tywoodís notions on time travel, orÖwhat do you call itÖmicro-temporal-translation?î
ìAh?î and Boulder smiled a little. ìHeís told you, then.î
ìNo, he hasnít,î said the Boss, harshly. ìProfessor Tywood is dead.î
ìWhat?î Then-îI donít believe you.î
ìHe died of apoplexy. Look at this.î
He had one of the photographs taken that first night in his wall safe. Tywoodís face was distorted but recognizable-sprawled and dead.
Boulderís breath went in and out as if the gears were clogged. He stared at the picture for three full minutes by the electric clock on the wall. ìWhere is this place?î he asked.
ìThe Atomic Power Plant. ì
ìHad he finished his experiment?î
The Boss shrugged: ìThereís no way of telling. He was dead when we found him.î
Boulderís lips were pinched and colorless. ìThat must be determined, somehow. A commission of scientists must be established, and, if necessary, the experiment must be repeated-î
But the Boss just looked at him, and reached for a cigar. Iíve never seen him take longer-and when he put it down, curled in its unused smoke, he said: ìTywood wrote an article for a magazine, twenty years ago-î
ìOh, ì and the professorís lips twisted, ìis that what gave you your clue? You may ignore that. The man is only a physical scientist and knows nothing of either history or sociology. A schoolboyís dreams and nothing more.î
ìThen, you donít think sending your translation back will inaugurate a Golden Age, do you?î
ìOf course not. Do you think you can graft the developments of two thousand years of slow labor onto a child society not ready for it? Do you think a great invention or a great scientific principle is born full-grown in the mind of a genius divorced from his cultural milieu? Newtonís enunciation of the Law of Gravity was delayed for twenty years because the then-current figure for the Earthís diameter was wrong by ten percent. Archimedes almost discovered calculus, but failed because Arabic numerals, invented by some nameless Hindu or group of Hindus, were unknown to him.
ìFor that matter, the mere existence of a slave society in ancient Greece and Rome meant that machines could scarcely attract much attention-slaves being so much cheaper and more adaptable. And men of true intellect could scarcely be expected to spend their energies on devices intended for manual labor. Even Archimedes, the greatest engineer of antiquity, refused to publish any of his practical inventions-only mathematic abstractions. And when a young man asked Plato of what use geometry was, he was forthwith expelled from the Academy as a man with a mean, unphilosophic soul.
ìScience does not plunge forward-it inches along in the directions permitted by the greater forces that mold society and which are in turn molded by society. And no great man advances but on the shoulders of the society that surrounds him-î
The Boss interrupted him at that point. ìSuppose you tell us what your part in Tywoodís work was, then. Weíll take your word for it that history cannot be changed.î
ìOh it can, but not purposefully-you see, when Tywood first requested my services in the matter of translating certain textbook passages into Greek, I agreed for the money involved. But he wanted the translation on parchment; he insisted on the use of ancient Greek terminology-the language of Plato, to use his words-regardless of how I had to twist the literal significance of passages, and he wanted it hand-written in rolls.
ìI was curious. I, too, found his magazine article. It was difficult for me to jump to the obvious conclusion, since the achievements of modem science transcend the imaginings of philosophy in so many ways. But I learned the truth eventually, and it was at once obvious that Tywoodís theory of changing history was infantile. There are twenty million variables for every instant of time, and no system of mathematics-no mathematic psychohistory, to coin a phrase-has yet been developed to handle that ocean of varying functions.
ìIn short, any variation of events two thousand years ago would change all subsequent history, but in no predictable way.î
The boss suggested, with a false quietness: ìLike the pebble that starts the avalanche, right?î
ìExactly. You have some understanding of the situation, I see. I thought deeply for weeks before I proceeded, and then I realized how I must act- must act.î
There was a low roar. The Boss stood up and his chair went over backward. He swung around his desk, and he had a hand on Boulderís throat. I was stepping out to stop him, but he waved me back-
He was only tightening the necktie a little. Boulder could still breathe. He had gone very white, and for all the time that the Boss talked, he restricted himself to just that-breathing.
And the Boss said: ìSure, I can see how you decided you must act. I know that some of you brain-sick philosophers think the world needs fixing. You want to throw the dice again and see what turns up. Maybe you donít even care if youíre alive in the new setup-or that no one can possibly know what youíve done. But youíre going to create, just the same. Youíre going to give God another chance, so to speak.
ìMaybe I just want to live-but the world could be worse. In twenty million different ways, it could be worse. A fellow named Wilder once wrote a play called The Skin of Our Teeth. Maybe youíve read it. Its thesis was that Mankind survived by just that skin of their teeth. No, Iím not going to give you a speech about the Ice Age nearly wiping us out. I donít know enough. Iím not even going to talk about the Greeks winning at Marathon; the Arabs being defeated at Tours; the Mongols turning back at the last minute without even being defeated-because Iím no historian.
ìBut take the Twentieth Century. The Germans were stopped at the Marne twice in World War I. Dunkirk happened in World War II, and somehow the Germans were stopped at Moscow and Stalingrad. We could have used the atom bomb in the last war and we didnít, and just when it looked as if both sides would have to, the Great Compromise happened-just because General Bruce was delayed in taking off from the Ceylon airfield long enough to receive the message directly. One after the other, just like that, all through history-lucky breaks. For every ëif that didnít come true that would have made wonder-men of all of us if it had, there were twenty ëifsí that didnít come true that would have brought disaster to all of us if they had.
ìYouíre gambling on that one-in-twenty chance-gambling every life on Earth. And youíve succeeded, too, because Tywood did send that text back.î
He ground out that last sentence, and opened his fist, so that Boulder could fall out and back into his chair.
And Boulder laughed.
ìYou fool, ì he gasped, bitterly, ìHow close you can be and yet how widely you can miss the mark. Tywood did send his book back, then? You are sure of that?î
ìNo chemical textbook in Greek was found on the scene,î said the Boss, grimly, ìand millions of calories of energy had disappeared. Which doesnít change the fact, however, that we have two and a half weeks in which to-make things interesting for you.î
ìOh, nonsense. No foolish dramatics, please. Just listen to me, and try to understand. There were Greek philosophers once, named Leucippus and Democritus, who evolved an atomic theory. All matter, they said, was composed of atoms. Varieties of atoms were distinct and changeless and by their different combinations with each other formed the various substances found in nature. That theory was not the result of experiment or observation. It came into being, somehow, full-grown.
ìThe didactic Roman poet Lucretius, in his ëDe Rerum Natura,í-ë On the Nature of Thingsí-elaborated on that theory and throughout manages to sound startlingly modem.
ìIn Hellenistic times, Hero built a steam engine and weapons of war became almost mechanized. The period has been referred to as an abortive mechanical age, which came to nothing because, somehow, it neither grew out of nor fitted into its social and economic milieu. Alexandrian science was a queer and rather inexplicable phenomenon.
ìThen one might mention the old Roman legend about the books of the Sibyl that contained mysterious information direct from the gods
ìIn other words, gentlemen, while you are right that any change in the course of past events, however trifling, would have incalculable consequences, and while I also believe that you are right in supposing that any random change is much more likely to be for the worse than for the better, I must point out that you are nevertheless wrong in your final conclusions.
ìBecause THIS is the world in which the Greek chemistry text WAS sent back.
ìThis has been a Red Queenís race, if you remember your ëThrough the Looking Glass.í In the Red Queenís country, one had to run as fast as one could merely to stay in the same place. And so it was in this case! Tywood may have thought he was creating a new world, but it was I who prepared the translations, and I took care that only such passages as would account for the queer scraps of knowledge the ancients apparently got from nowhere would be included
ìAnd my only intention, for all my racing, was to stay in the same place.î
Three weeks passed; three months; three years. Nothing happened. When nothing happens, you have no proof. We gave up trying to explain, and we ended, the Boss and I, by doubting it ourselves.
The case never ended. Boulder could not be considered a criminal without being considered a world savior as well, and vice versa. He was ignored. And in the end, the case was neither solved, nor closed out; merely put in a file all by itself, under the designation ì?î and buried in the deepest vault in Washington.
The Boss is in Washington now; a big wheel. And Iím Regional Head of the Bureau.
Boulder is still assistant professor, though. Promotions are slow at the University.



***



ìThe Red Queenís Race,î my fifty-eighth story, was the first to be written by Dr. Asimov.
In September I began another story, ìMother Earth,î and submitted it to Campbell on October 12, 1948. After a comparatively small revision of the ending, he took that one, too.








Mother Earth


ìBut can you be certain? Are you sure that even a professional historian can always distinguish between victory and defeat?î
Gustav Stein, who delivered himself of that mocking question with a whiskered smile and a gentle wipe at the gray mustache from the neighborhood of which he had just removed an empty glass, was not an historian. He was a physiologist.
But his companion was an historian, and he accepted the gentle thrust with a smile of his own.
Steinís apartment was, for Earth, quite luxurious. It lacked the empty privacy of the Outer Worlds, of course, since from its window there stretched outward a phenomenon that belonged only to the home planet-a city. A large city, full of people, rubbing shoulders, mingling sweat
Nor was Steinís apartment fitted with its own power and its own utility supply. It lacked even the most elementary quota of positronic robots. In short, it lacked the dignity of self-sufficiency, and like all things on Earth, it was merely part of a community, a pendant unit of a cluster, a portion of a mob.
But Stein was an Earthman by birth and used to it. And after all, by Earth standards the apartment was still luxurious.
It was just that looking outward through the same windows before which lay the city, one could see the stars and among them the Outer Worlds, where there were no cities but only gardens; where the lawns were streaks of emerald, where all human beings were kings, and where all good Earthmen earnestly and vainly hoped to go some day.
Except for a few who knew better-like Gustav Stein.
The Friday evenings with Edward Field belonged to that class of ritual which comes with age and quiet life. It broke the week pleasantly for two elderly bachelors, and gave them an innocuous reason to linger over the sherry and the stars. It took them away from the crudities of life, and, most of all, it let them talk.
Field, especially, as a lecturer, scholar and man of modest means quoted chapter and verse from his still uncompleted history of Terrestrian Empire.
ìI wait for the last act, ì he explained. ìThen I can call it the ëDecline and Fall of Empireí and publish it.î
ìYou must expect the last act to come soon, then.î
ìIn a sense, it has come already. It is just that it is best to wait for all to recognize that fact. You see, there are three times when an Empire or an Economic System or a Social Institution falls, you skeptic-î
Field paused for effect and waited patiently for Stein to say, ì And those times are?î
ìFirst,î Field ticked off a right forefinger, ìthere is the time when just a little nub shows up that points an inexorable way to finality. It canít be seen or recognized until the finality arrives, when the original nub becomes visible to hindsight.î
ìAnd you can tell what that little nub is?î
ìI think so, since I already have the advantage of a century and a half of hindsight. It came when the Sirian sector colony, Aurora, first obtained permission of the Central Government at Earth to introduce positronic robots into their community life. Obviously, looking back at it, the road was clear for the development of a thoroughly mechanized society based upon robot labor and not human labor. And it is this mechanization that has been and will yet be the deciding factor in the struggle between the Outer Worlds and Earth.î
ìIt is?î murmured the physiologist. ìHow infernally clever you historians are. What and where is the second time the Empire fell?î
ìThe second point in time,î and Field gently bent his right middle finger backward, ìarrives when a signpost is raised for the expert so large and plain that it can be seen even without the aid of perspective. And that point has been passed, too, with the first establishment of an immigration quota against Earth by the Outer Worlds. The fact that Earth found itself unable to prevent an action so obviously detrimental to itself was a shout for all to hear, and that was fifty years ago.î
ìBetter and better. And the third point?î
ìThe third point?î Down went the ring finger. ìThat is the least important. That is when the signpost becomes a wall with a huge ëThe Endí scrawled upon it. The only requirement for knowing that the end has come, then, is neither perspective nor training, but merely the ability to listen to the video.î
ìI take it that the third point in time has not yet come.î
ìObviously not, or you would not need to ask. Yet it may come soon; for instance, if there is war.î
ìDo you think there will be?î
Field avoided commitment. ìTimes are unsettled, and a good deal of futile emotion is sweeping Earth on the immigration question. And if there should be a war, Earth would be defeated quickly and lastingly, and the wall would be erected.î
ìCan you be certain? Are you sure that even a professional historian can always distinguish between victory and defeat?î
Field smiled. He said: ìYou may know something I do not. For instance, they talk about something called the ëPacific Project.í ì
ìI never heard of it.î Stein refilled the two glasses, ìLet us speak of other things.î
He held up his glass to the broad window So that the far stars flickered rosily in the clear liquid and said: ìTo a happy ending to Earthís troubles.î
Field held up his own, ìTo the Pacific Project.î
Stein sipped gently and said: ìBut we drink to two different things.î
ìDo we?î
It is quite difficult to describe any of the Outer Worlds to a native Earthman, since it is not So much a description of a world that is required as a description of a state of mind. The Outer Worlds-some fifty of them, originally colonies, later dominions, later nations-differ extremely among themselves in a physical sense. But the state of mind is somewhat the same throughout.
It is something that grows out of a world not originally congenial to mankind, yet populated by the cream of the difficult, the different, the daring, the deviant.
If it is to be expressed in a word, that word is ìindividuality.î
There is the world of Aurora, for instance, three parsecs from Earth. It was the first planet settled outside the Solar System, and represented the dawn of interstellar travel. Hence its name.
It had air and water to start with, perhaps, but on Earthly standards it was rocky and infertile. The plant life that did exist, sustained by a yellow-green pigment completely unrelated to chlorophyll and not as efficient, gave the comparatively fertile regions a decidedly bilious and unpleasant appearance to unaccustomed eyes. No animal life higher than unicellular, and the equivalent of bacteria as well, were present. Nothing dangerous, naturally, since the two biological systems, of Earth and Aurora, were chemically unrelated.
Aurora became, quite gradually, a patchwork. Grains and fruit trees came first; shrubs, flowers, and grass afterward. Herds of livestock followed. And, as if it were necessary to prevent too close a copy of the mother planet, positronic robots also came to build the mansions, carve the landscapes, lay the power units. In short, to do the work, and turn the planet green and human.
There was the luxury of a new world and unlimited mineral resources. There was the splendid excess of atomic power laid out on new foundations with merely thousands, or, at most, millions, not billions, to service. There was the vast flowering of physical science, in worlds where there was room for it.
Take the home of Franklin Maynard, for instance, who, with his wife, three children, and twenty-seven robots, lived on an estate more than forty miles away, in distance, from the nearest neighbor. Yet by community-wave he could, if he wished, share the living room of any of the seventy-five million on Aurora-with each singly; with all simultaneously.
Maynard knew every inch of his valley. He knew just where it ended, sharply, and gave way to the alien crags, along whose undesirable slopes the angular, sharp leaves of the native furze clung sullenly-as if in hatred of the softer matter that had usurped its place in the sun.
Maynard did not have to leave that valley. He was a deputy in the Gathering, and a member of the Foreign Agents Committee, but he could transact all business but the most extremely essential, by community-wave, without ever sacrificing that precious privacy he had to have in a way no Earthman could understand.
Even the present business could be performed by community-wave. The man, for instance, who sat with him in his living room, was Charles Hijkman, and he, actually, was sitting in his own living room on an island in an artificial lake stocked with fifty varieties of fish, which happened to be twenty-five hundred miles distant, in space.
The connection was an illusion, of course. If Maynard were to reach out a hand, he could feel the invisible wall.
Even the robots were quite accustomed to the paradox, and when Hijkman raised a hand for a cigarette, Maynardís robot made no move to satisfy the desire, though a half-minute passed before Hijkmanís own robot could do so.
The two men spoke like Outer Worlders, that is, stiffly and in syllables too clipped to be friendly, and yet certainly not hostile. Merely undefinably lacking in the cream-however sour and thin at times-of human sociability which is so forced upon the inhabitants of Earthís ant heaps.
Maynard said: ìI have long wanted a private communion, Hijkman. My duties in the Gathering, this year-î
ìQuite. That is understood. You are welcome now, of course. In fact, especially so, since I have heard of the superior nature of your grounds and landscaping. Is it true that your cattle are fed on imported grass?î
ìIím afraid that is a slight exaggeration. Actually, certain of my best milkers feed on Terrestrial imports during calving time, but such a procedure would be prohibitively expensive, Iím afraid, if made general. It yields quite extraordinary milk, however. May I have the privilege of sending you a dayís output?î
ìIt would be most kind of you.î Hijkman bent his head, gravely. ìYou must receive some of my salmon in return.î
To a Terrestrial eye, the two men might have appeared much alike. Both were tall, though not unusually so for Aurora, where the average height of the adult male is six feet one and one half inches. Both were blond and hard-muscled, with sharp and pronounced features. Though neither was younger than forty, middle-age as yet sat lightly upon them.
So much for amenities. Without a change in tone, Maynard proceeded to the serious purpose of his call.
He said: ìThe Committee, you know, is now largely engaged with Moreanu and his Conservatives. We would like to deal with them firmly, we of the Independents, that is. But before we can do so with the requisite calm and certainty, I would like to ask you certain questions.î
ìWhy me?î
ìBecause you are Auroraís most important physicist.î Modesty is an unnatural attitude, and one which is only with difficulty taught to children. In an individualistic society it is useless and Hijkman was, therefore, unencumbered with it. He simply nodded objectively at Maynardís last words.
ìAnd,î continued Maynard, ëëas one of us. You are an Independent.î
ìI am a member of the Party. Dues-paying, but not very active.î
ìNevertheless safe. Now, tell me, have you heard of the Pacific Project.î
ìThe Pacific Project?î There was a polite inquiry in his words.
ìIt is something which is taking place on Earth. The Pacific is a Terrestrial ocean, but the name itself probably has no significance.î
ìI have never heard of it.î
ìI am not surprised. Few have, even on Earth. Our communion, by the way, is via tight-beam and nothing must go further.î
ìI understand.î
ìWhatever Pacific Project is-and our agents are extremely vague -it might conceivably be a menace. Many of those who on Earth pass for scientists seem to be connected with it. Also, some of Earthís more radical and foolish politicians.î
ìHm-m-m. There was once something called the Manhattan Project.î
ìYes,î urged Maynard, ìwhat about it?î
ìOh, itís an ancient thing. It merely occurred to me because of the analogy in names. The Manhattan Project was before the time of extra-terrestrial travel. Some petty war in the dark ages occurred, and it was the name given to a group of scientists who developed atomic power.î
ìAh,î Maynardís hand became a fist, ìand what do you think the Pacific Project can do, then?î
Hijkman considered. Then, softly: ìDo you think Earth is planning war?î
On Maynardís face there was a sudden expression of distaste. ìSix billion people. Six billion half-apes, rather, jammed into one system to a near-explosion point, facing only some millions of us, total. Donít you think it is a dangerous situation?î
ìOh, numbers!î
ìAll right. Are we safe despite the numbers? Tell me. Iím only an administrator, and youíre a physicist. Can Earth win a war in any way?î
Hijkman sat solemnly in his chair and thought carefully and slowly. Then he said: ìLet us reason. There are three broad classes of methods whereby an individual or group can gain his ends against opposition. On an increasing level of subtlety, those three classes can be termed the physical, the biological, and the psychological.
ìNow, the physical can be easily eliminated. Earth does not have an industrial background. It does not have a technical know-how. It has very limited resources. It lacks even a single outstanding physical scientist. So it is as impossible as anything in the Galaxy can be that they can develop any form of physico-chemical application that is not already known to the Outer Worlds. Provided, of course, that the conditions of the problem imply single-handed opposition on the part of Earth against any or all of the Outer Worlds. I take it that none of the Outer Worlds intends leaguing with Earth against us.î
Maynard indicated violent opposition even to the suggestion, ìNo, no, no. There is no question of that. Put it out of your mind.î
ìThen, ordinary physical surprise weapons are inconceivable. It is useless to discuss it further.î
ìThen, what about your second class, the biological?î
Slowly, Hijkman lifted his eyebrows: ìNow, that is less certain. Some Terrestrial biologists are quite competent, I am told. Naturally, since I am myself a physicist, I am not entirely qualified to judge this. Yet I believe that in certain restricted fields, they are still expert. In agricultural science, of course, to give an obvious example. And in bacteriology. Um-m-m-î
ìYes, what about bacteriological warfare?î
ìA thought! But no, no, quite inconceivable. A teeming, constricted world such as Earth cannot afford to fight an open latticework of fifty sparse worlds with germs. They are infinitely more subject to epidemics, that is, to retaliation in kind. In fact, I would say that given our living conditions here on Aurora and on the other Outer Worlds, no contagious disease could really take hold. No, Maynard. You can check with a bacteriologist, but I think heíll tell you the same.î
Maynard said: ìAnd the third class?î
ìThe psychological? Now, that is unpredictable. And yet the Outer Worlds are intelligent and healthy communities and not amenable to ordinary propaganda, or for that matter to any form of unhealthy emotionalism. Now, I wonder-î
ìYes?î
ìWhat if the Pacific Project is just that? I mean, a huge device to keep us off balance. Something top-secret, but meant to leak out in just the right fashion, so that the Outer Worlds yield a little to Earth. simply in order to play safe.î
There was a longish silence.
ìImpossible,î burst out Maynard, angrily.
ìYou react properly. You hesitate. But I donít seriously press the interpretation. It is merely a thought.î
A longer silence, then Hijkman spoke again: ì Are there any other questions?î
Maynard started out of a reverie, ìNoÖno-î
The wave broke off and a wall appeared where space had been a moment before.
Slowly, with stubborn disbelief, Franklin Maynard shook his head.
Ernest Keilin mounted the stairs with a feeling for all the past centuries. The building was old, cobwebbed with history. It once housed the Parliament of Man, and from it words went out that clanged throughout the stars.
It was a tall building. It soared-stretched-strained. Out and up to the stars, it reached; to the stars that had now turned away.
It no longer even housed the Parliament of Earth. That had now been switched to a newer, neoclassical building, one that imperfectly aped the architectural stylisms of the ancient pre-Atomic age.
Yet the older building still held its great name. Officially, it was still Stellar House, but it only housed the functionaries of a shriveled bureaucracy now.
Keilin got out at the twelfth floor, and the lift dropped quickly down behind him. The radiant sign said smoothly and quietly: Bureau of Information. He handed a letter to the receptionist. He waited. And eventually, he passed through the door which said, ìL. z. Cellioni-Secretary of Information.î
Cellioni was little and dark. His hair was thick and black, his mustache thin and black. His teeth, when he smiled, were startlingly white and even-so he smiled often.
He was smiling now, as he rose and held out his hand. Keilin took it, then an offered seat, then an offered cigar.
Cellioni said: ìI am very happy to see you, Mr. Keilin. It is kind of you to fly here from New York on such short notice.î
Keilin curved the corners of his lips down and made a tiny gesture with one hand, deprecating the whole business
ìAnd now,î continued Cellioni, ìI presume you would like an explanation of all this.î
ìI wouldnít refuse one,î said Keilin.
ìUnfortunately, it is difficult to know exactly how to explain. As Secretary of Information, my position is difficult. I must safeguard the security and well-being of Earth and, at the same time, observe our traditional freedom of the press. Naturally, and fortunately, we have no censorship, but just as naturally, there are times when we could almost wish we did have.î
ìIs this,î asked Keilin, ìwith reference to me? About censorship, I mean?î
Cellioni did not answer directly. Instead, he smiled again, slowly, and with a remarkable absence of joviality.
He said: ìYou, Mr. Keilin, have one of the most widely heard and influential talecasts on the video. Therefore, you are of peculiar interest to the government.î
ìThe time is mine,î said Keilin, stubbornly. ìI pay for it I pay taxes on the income I derive from it I adhere to all the common-law rulings on taboos. So I donít quite see of what interest I can be to the government.î
ìOh, you misunderstand me. Itís my fault, I suppose, for not being clearer. You have committed no crime, broken no laws. I have only admiration for your journalistic ability. What I refer to is your editorial attitude at times.î
ìWith respect to what?î
ìWith respect,î said Cellioni, with a sudden harshness about his thin lips, ìto our policy toward the Outer Worlds.î
ìMy editorial attitude represents what I feel and think, Mr. Secretary.î
ìI allow this. You have your right to your feelings and your thoughts. Yet it is injudicious to spread them about nightly to an audience of half a billion.î
ìInjudicious, according to you, perhaps. But legal, according to anybody.î
ìIt is sometimes necessary to place good of Country above a strict and selfish interpretation of legality.î
Keilin tapped his foot twice and frowned blackly.
ìLook,î he said, ìput this frankly. What is it you want?î
The Secretary of Information spread his hands out before him. ìIn a word-co-operation! Really, Mr. Keilin, we canít have you weakening the will of the people. Do you appreciate the position of Earth? Six billions, and a declining food supply! It is insupportable! And emigration is the only solution. No patriotic Earthman can fail to see the justice of our position. No reasonable human being anywhere can fail to see the justice of it.î
Keilin said: ìI agree with your premise that the population problem is serious, but emigration is not the only solution. In fact, emigration is the one sure way of hastening destruction.î
ìReally? And why do you say that?î
ìBecause the Outer Worlds will not permit emigration, and you can force their hand by war only. And we cannot win a war. î
ìTell me,î said Cellioni softly, ìhave you ever tried emigrating? It seems to me you could qualify. You are quite tall, rather light-haired, intelligent-î
The video-man Hushed. He said, curtly: ìI have hay fever.î
ìWell,î and the secretary smiled, ìthen you must have good reason for disapproving their arbitrary genetic and racist policies.î
Keilin replied with heat: ìI wonít be influenced by personal motives. I would disapprove their policies, if I qualified perfectly for emigration. But my disapproval would alter nothing. Their policies are their policies, and they can enforce them. Moreover, their policies have some reason even if wrong. Mankind is starting again on the Outer Worlds, and they-the ones who got there first-would like to eliminate some of the Haws of the human mechanism that have become obvious with time. A hay fever sufferer is a bad egg-genetically. A cancer prone even more so. Their prejudices against skin and hair colors are, of course, senseless, but I can grant that they are interested in uniformity and homogeneity. And as for Earth, we can do much even without the help of the Outer Worlds.î
ìFor instance, what?î
ìPositronic robots and hydroponic farming should be introduced, and-most of all-birth control must be instituted. An intelligent birth control, that is, based on firm psychiatric principles intended to eliminate the psychotic trends, congenital infirmities-î
ìAs they do in the Outer Worlds-î
ìNot at all. I have mentioned no racist principles. I talk only of mental and physical infirmities that are held in common by all ethnic and racial groups. And most of all, births must be held below deaths until a healthful equilibrium is reached.î
Cellioni said, grimly: ìWe lack the industrial techniques and the resources to introduce a robot-hydroponic technology in anything less than five centuries. Furthermore, the traditions of Earth, as well as current ethical beliefs, forbid robot labor and false foods. Most of all, they forbid the slaughter of unborn children. Now, come, Keilin, we canít have you pouring this out over video. It wonít work; it distracts the attention; it weakens the will.î
Keilin broke in, impatiently: ìMr. Secretary, do you want war?î
ìDo I want war? That is an impudent question.î
ìThen, who are the policy-makers in the government who do want war? For instance, who is responsible for the calculated rumor of the Pacific Project?î
ìThe Pacific Project? And where did you hear of that?î
ìMy sources are my secret.î
ìThen, Iíll tell you. You heard of this Pacific Project from Moreanu of Aurora on his recent trip to Earth. We know more about you than you suppose, Mr. Keilin.î
ìI believe that, but I do not admit that I received information from Moreanu. Why do you think I could get information from him? Is it because he was deliberately allowed to learn of this piece of trumpery?î
ìTrumpery?î
ìYes. I think Pacific Project is a fake. A fake meant to inspire confidence. I think the government plans to let the so-called secret leak out in order to strengthen its war policy. It is part of a war of nerves on Earthís own people, and it will be the ruin of Earth in the end.î
ìAnd I will take this theory of mine to the people.î
ìYou will not, Mr. Keilin,î said Cellioni, quietly.
ìI will.î
ìMr. Keilin, your friend, Ion Moreanu is having his troubles on Aurora, perhaps for being too friendly with you. Take care that you do not have equal trouble for being too friendly with him.î
ìIím not worried.î The video man laughed shortly, lunged to his feet and strode to the door.
Keilin smiled very gently when he found the door blocked by two large men: ìYou mean, I am under arrest right now.î
ìExactly,î said Cellioni.
ìOn what charge?î
ìWeíll think of some later.î
Keilin left-under escort.
On Aurora, the mirror image of the afore-described events was taking place, and on a larger scale.
The Foreign Agents Committee of the Gathering had been meeting now for days-ever since the session of the Gathering in which Ion Moreanu and his Conservative Party made their great bid to force a vote of no confidence. That it had failed was in part due to the superior political generalship of the Independents, and in some part due to the activity of this same Foreign Agents Committee.
For months now, the evidence had been accumulating, and when the vote of confidence turned out to be sizably in favor of the Independents, the Committee was able to strike in its own way.
Moreanu was subpoenaed in his own home, and placed under house arrest. Although this procedure of house arrest was not, under the circumstances, legal-a fact emphatically pointed out by Moreanu-it was nevertheless successfully accomplished.
For three days Moreanu was cross-examined thoroughly, in polite, even tones that scarcely ever veered from unemotional curiosity. The seven inquisitors of the Committee took turns in questioning, but Moreanu had respite only for ten-minute intervals during the hours in which the Committee sat.
After three days, he showed the effects. He was hoarse with demanding that he be faced with his accusers; weary with insisting that he be informed of the exact nature of the charges; throat-broken with shouting against the illegality of the procedure.
The Committee finally read statements at him-
ìIs this true or not? Is this true or not?î
Moreanu could merely shake his head wearily as the structure spidered about him.
He challenged the competency of the evidence and was smoothly informed that the proceedings constituted a Committee Investigation and not a trial
The chairman clapped his gavel, finally. He was a broad man of tremendous purpose. He spoke for an hour in his final summing up of the results of the inquiry, but only a relatively short portion of it need be quoted.
He said: ìIf you had merely conspired with others on Aurora, we could understand you, even forgive you. Such a fault would have been held in common with many ambitious men in history. It is not that at all. What horrifies us and removes all pity is your eagerness to consort with the disease-ridden, ignorant and subhuman remnants of Earth.
ìYou, the accused, stand here under a heavy weight of evidence showing you to have conspired with the worst elements of Earthís mongrel population-î
The chairman was interrupted by an agonized cry from Moreanu, ìBut the motive! What motive can you possibly attribute-î
The accused was pulled back into his seat. The chairman pursed his lips and departed from the slow gravity of his prepared speech to improvise a bit.
ìIt is not,î he said, ìfor this Committee to go into your motives. We have shown the facts of the case. The Committee does have evidence-î He paused, and looked along the line of the members to the right and the left, then continued. ìI think I may say that the Committee has evidence that points to your intentions to use Earth man power to engineer a coup that would leave you dictator over Aurora. But since the evidence has not been used, I will go no further into that, except to say that such a consummation is not inconsistent with your character as displayed at these hearings.î
He went back to his speech. ìThose of us who sit here have heard, I think, of something termed the ëPacific Project,í which, according to rumors, represents an attempt on the part of Earth to retrieve its lost dominions.
ìIt is needless to emphasize here that any such attempt must be doomed to failure. And yet defeat for us is not entirely inconceivable. One thing can cause us to stumble, and that one thing is an unsuspected internal weakness. Genetics is, after all, still an imperfect science. Even with twenty generations behind us, undesirable traits may crop up at scattered points, and each represents a flaw in the steel shield of Auroraís strength.
ìThat is the Pacific Project-the use of our own criminals and traitors against us; and if they can find such in our inner councils, the Earthmen might even succeed.
ìThe Foreign Agents Committee exists to combat that threat. In the accused, we touch the fringes of the web. We must go on-î
The speech did, at any rate.
When it was concluded, Moreanu, pale, wide-eyed, pounded his fist, ìI demand my say-î
ìThe accused may speak, ì said the chairman.
Moreanu rose and looked about him for a long moment. The room, fitted for an audience of seventy-five million by Community Wave, was unattended. There were the inquisitors, legal staff, official recorders-and with him, in the actual flesh, his guards.
He would have done better with an audience. To whom could he otherwise appeal? His glance fled hopelessly from each face it touched, but could find nothing better.
ìFirst,î he said, ìI deny the legality of this meeting. My constitutional rights of privacy and individuality have been denied. I have been tried by a group without standing as a court, by individuals convinced, in advance, of my guilt. I have been denied adequate opportunity to defend myself. In fact, I have been treated throughout as an already convicted criminal requiring only sentence.
ìI deny, completely and without reservation, that I have been engaged in any activity detrimental to the state or tending to subvert any of its fundamental institutions.
ìI accuse, vigorously and unreservedly, this Committee of deliberately using its powers to win political battles. I am guilty not of treason, but of disagreement. I disagree with a policy dedicated to the destruction of the larger part of the human race for reasons that are trivial and inhumane.
ìRather than destruction, we owe assistance to these men who are condemned to a harsh, unhappy life solely because it was our ancestors and not theirs who happened to reach the Outer Worlds first. With our technology and resources, they can yet re-create and redevelop-ì
The chairmanís voice rose above the intense near-whisper of Moreanu, ìYou are out of order. The Committee is quite prepared to hear any remarks you make in your own defense, but a sermon on the rights of Earthmen is outside the legitimate realm of the discussion.î
The hearings were formally closed. It was a great political victory for the Independents; all would agree to that. Of the members of the Committee, only Franklin Maynard was not completely satisfied. A small, nagging doubt remained.
He wondered-
Should he try, one last time? Should he speak once more and then no more to that queer little monkey ambassador from Earth? He made his decision quickly and acted upon it instantly. Only a pause to arrange a witness, since even for himself an unwitnessed private communion with an Earthman might be dangerous.
Luiz Moreno, Ambassador to Aurora from Earth, was, to put not too fine a point on it, a miserable figure of a man. And that wasnít exactly an accident. On the whole, the foreign diplomats of Earth tended to be dark, short, wizen, or weakly-or all four.
That was only self-protection, since the Outer Worlds exerted strong attraction for any Earthman. Diplomats exposed to the allure of Aurora, for instance, could not but be exceedingly reluctant to return to Earth. Worse, and more dangerous, exposure meant a growing sympathy with the demigods of the stars and a growing alienation from the slum-dwellers of Earth.
Unless, of course, the ambassador found himself rejected. Unless he found himself somewhat despised. And then, no more faithful servant of Earth could be imagined, no man less subject to corruption.
The Ambassador to Earth was only five foot two, with a bald head and receding forehead, a pinkish affectation of beard and red-rimmed eyes. He was suffering from a slight cold, the occasional results whereof he smothered in a handkerchief. And yet, withal, he was a man of intellect.
To Franklin Maynard, the sight and sound of the Earthman was distressing. He grew queasy at each cough and shuddered when the ambassador wiped his nose.
Maynard said: ìYour excellency, we commune at my request because I wish to inform you that the Gathering has decided to ask your recall by your government.î
ìThat is kind of you, councilor. I had an inkling of this. And for what reason?î
ìThe reason is not within the bounds of discussion. I believe it is the prerogative of a sovereign state to decide for itself whether a foreign representative shall be persona grata or not. Nor do I think you really need enlightenment on this matter.î
ìVery well, then.î The ambassador paused to wield his handkerchief and murmur an apology. îIs that all?î
Maynard said: ìNot quite. There are matters I would like to mention. Remain!î
The ambassadorís reddened nostrils flared a bit, but he smiled, and said: ìAn honor.î
ìYour world, excellency,î said Maynard, superciliously, ìdisplays a certain belligerence of late that we on Aurora find most annoying and unnecessary. I trust that you will find your return to Earth at this point a convenient opportunity to use your influence against further displays such as recently occurred in New York, where two Aurorans were manhandled by a mob. The payment of an indemnity may not be enough the next time.î
ìBut that is emotional overflow, Councilor Maynard. Surely, you cannot consider youngsters shouting in the streets to be adequate representations of belligerence.î
ìIt is backed by your governmentís actions in many ways. The recent arrest of Mr. Ernest Keilin, for instance.î
ìWhich is a purely domestic affair,î said the ambassador, quietly.
ìBut not one to demonstrate a reasonable spirit toward the Outer Worlds. Keilin was one of the few Earthmen who until recently could yet make their voices heard. He was intelligent enough to realize that no divine right protects the inferior man simply because he is inferior.î
The ambassador arose: ìI am not interested in Auroran theories on racial differences.î
ìA moment. Your government may realize that much of their plans have gone awry with the arrest of your agent, Moreanu. Stress the fact that we of Aurora are much wiser than we have been prior to this arrest. It may serve to give them pause.î
ìIs Moreanu my agent? Really, councilor, if I am disaccredited, I shall leave. But surely the loss of diplomatic immunity does not affect my personal immunity as an honest man from charges of espionage.î
ìIsnít that your job?î
ìDo Aurorans take it for granted that espionage and diplomacy are identical? My government will be glad to hear it. We shall take appropriate precautions.î
ìThen, you defend Moreanu? You deny that he has been working for Earth?î
ìI defend only myself. As to Moreanu, I am not stupid enough to say anything.î
ìWhy stupid?î
ìWouldnít a defense by myself be but another indictment against him? I neither accuse nor defend him. Your governmentís quarrel with Moreanu, like my governmentís with Keilin-whom you, by the way, are most suspiciously eager to defend-is an internal affair. I will leave now.î
The communion broke, and almost instantly the wall faded again. Hijkman was looking thoughtfully at Maynard.
ìWhat do you think of him?î asked Maynard, grimly.
ìDisgraceful that such a travesty of humanity should walk Aurora, I think.î
ìI agree with you, and yetÖand yet-î
ìWell?î
ìAnd yet I can almost find myself able to think that he is the master and that we dance to his piping. You know of Moreanu?î
ìOf course.î
ìWell, he will be convicted, sent to an asteroid. His party will be broken. Offhand, anyone would say that such actions represent a horrible defeat for Earth.î
ìIs there doubt in your mind that such is the case?î
ìIím not sure. Committee Chairman Bond insisted on airing his theory that Pacific Project was the name Earth gave to a device for using internal traitors on the Outer Worlds. But I donít think so. Iím not sure the facts fit that. For instance, where did we get our evidence against Moreanu?î
ìI certainly canít say.î
ìOur agents, in the first place. But how did they get it? The evidence was a little too convincing. Moreanu could have guarded himself better-î
Maynard hesitated. He seemed to be attempting a blush, and failing. ìWell, to put it quickly, I think it was the Terrestrian Ambassador who somehow presented us with the most evidence. I think that he played on Moreanuís sympathy for Earth first to befriend him and then to betray him.î
ìWhy?î
ìI donít know. To insure war, perhaps-with this Pacific Project waiting for us.î
ìI donít believe it.î
ìI know. I have no proof. Nothing but suspicion. The Committee wouldnít believe me either. It seemed to me, perhaps, that a last talk with the ambassador might reveal something, but his mere appearance antagonizes me, and I find I spend most of my time trying to remove him from my sight.î
ìWell, you are becoming emotional, my friend. It is a disgusting weakness. I hear that you have been appointed a delegate to the Interplanetary Gathering at Hesperus. I congratulate you.î
ìThanks,î said Maynard, absently.
Luiz Moreno, ex-Ambassador to Aurora, had been glad to return to Earth. He was away from the artificial landscapes that seemed to have no life of their own, but to exist only by virtue of the strong will of their possessors. Away from the too-beautiful men and women and from their ubiquitous, brooding robots.
He was back to the hum of life and the shuffle of feet; the brushing of shoulders and the feeling of breath in the face.
Not that he was able to enjoy these sensations entirely. The first days had been spent in lively conferences with the heads of Earthís government.
In fact, it was not till nearly a week had passed, that an hour came in which he could consider himself truly relaxed.
He was in the rarest of all appurtenances of Terrestrial Luxury-a roof garden. With him was Gustav Stein, the quite obscure physiologist, who was, nevertheless, one of the prime movers of the Plan, known to rumor as the Pacific Project.
ìThe confirmatory tests,î said Moreno, with an almost dreadful satisfaction, ìall check so far, do they not?î
ìSo far. Only so far. We have miles to go.î
ìYet they will continue to go well. To one who has lived on Aurora for nearly a year, as I have, there can be no doubt but that weíre on the right track.î
ìUm-m-m. Nevertheless, I will go only by the laboratory reports.î
ìAnd quite rightly.î His little body was almost stiff with gloating. ìSome day, it will be different. Stein, you have not met these men, these Outer Worlders. You may have come across the tourists, perhaps, in their special hotels, or riding through the streets in inclosed cars, equipped with the purest of private, air-conditioned atmospheres for their well-bred nostrils; observing the sights through a movable periscope and shuddering away from the touch of an Earthman.
ìBut you have not met them on their own world, secure in their own sickly, rotting greatness. Go, Stein, and be despised a while. Go, and find how well you can compete with their own trained lawns as something to be gently trod upon.
ìAnd yet, when I pulled the proper cords, Ion Moreanu fell-Ion Moreanu, the only man among them with the capacity to understand the workings of anotherís mind. It is the crisis that we have passed now. We front a smooth path now.î
Satisfaction! Satisfaction!
ìAs for Keilin,î he said suddenly, more to himself than to Stein, ìhe can be turned loose now. Thereís little he can say, hereafter, that can endanger anything. In fact, I have an idea. The Interplanetary Conference opens on Hesperus within the month. He can be sent to report the meeting. It will be an earnest of our friendliness-and keep him away for the summer. I think it can be arranged.î
It was.
Of all the Outer Worlds, Hesperus was the smallest, the latest settled, the furthest from Earth. Hence the name. In a physical sense, it was not best suited to a great diplomatic gathering, since its facilities were small. For instance, the available community-wave network could not possibly be stretched to cover all the delegates, secretarial staff, and administrators necessary in a convocation of fifty planets. So meetings in person were arranged in buildings impressed for the purpose.
Yet there was a symbolism in the choice of meeting place that escaped practically nobody. Hesperus, of all the Worlds, was furthest removed from Earth. But the spatial distance-one hundred parsecs or more-was the least of it. The important point was that Hesperus had been colonized not by Earthmen, but by men from the Outer World of Faunus.
It was therefore of the second generation, and so it had no ìMother Earth.î Earth to it was but a vague grandmother, lost in the stars.
As is usual in all such gatherings, little work is actually done on the session floors. That space is reserved for the official soundings of whatever is primarily intended for home ears. The actual swapping and horse-trading takes place in the lobbies and at the lunch-tables and many an irresolvable conflict has softened over the soup and vanished over the nuts.
And yet particular difficulties were present in this particular case. Not in all worlds was the community-wave as paramount and all-pervading as it was on Aurora, but it was prominent in all. It was, therefore, with a certain sense of outrage and loss that the tall, dignified men found it necessary to approach one another in the flesh, without the comforting privacy of the invisible wall between, without the warm knowledge of the breakswitch at their fingertips.
They faced one another in uneasy semi-embarrassment and tried not to watch one another eat; tried not to shrink at the unmeant touch. Even robot service was rationed.
Ernest Keilin, the only accredited video-representative from Earth, was aware of some of these matters only in the vague way they are described here. A more precise insight he could not have. Nor could anyone brought up in a society where human beings exist only in the plural, and where a house need only be deserted to be feared.
So it was that certain of the most subtle tensions escaped him at the formal dinner party given by the Hesperian government during the third week of the conference. Other tensions, however, did not pass him by.
The gathering after the dinner naturally fell apart into little groups. Keilin joined the one that contained Franklin Maynard of Aurora. As the delegate of the largest of the Worlds, he was naturally the most newsworthy.
Maynard was speaking casually between sips at the tawny Hesperian cocktail in his hand. If his flesh crawled slightly at the closeness of the others, he masked the feeling masterfully.
ìEarth,î he said, ìis, in essence, helpless against us if we avoid unpredictable military adventures. Economic unity is actually a necessity, if we intend to avoid such adventures. Let Earth realize to how great an extent her economy depends upon us, on the things that we alone can supply her, and there will be no more talk of living space. And if we are united, Earth would never dare attack. She will exchange her barren longings for atomic motors-or not, as she pleases.î
And he turned to regard Keilin with a certain hauteur as the other found himself stung to comment:
ìBut your manufactured goods, councilor-I mean those you ship to Earth-they are not given us. They are exchanged for agricultural products.î
Maynard smiled silkily. ìYes, I believe the delegate from Tethys has mentioned that fact at length. There is a delusion prevalent among some of us that only Terrestrial seeds grow properly-î
He was interrupted calmly by another, who said: ìNow, I am not from Tethys, but what you mention is not a delusion. I grow rye on Rhea, and I have never yet been able to duplicate Terrestrial bread. It just hasnít got the same taste.î He addressed the audience in general, ìIn fact, I imported half a dozen Terrestrians five years back on agricultural laborer visas so they could oversee the robots. Now, they can do wonders with the land, you know. Where they spit, corn grows fifteen feet high. Well, that helped a little. And using Terrestrian seed helped. But even if you grow Terrestrian grain, its seed wonít hold the next year.î
ìHas your soil been tested by your governmentís agricultural department?î asked Maynard.
The Rhean grew haughty in his turn: ìNo better soil in the sector. And the rye is top-grade. I even sent a hundredweight down to Earth for nutritional clearance, and it came back with full marks.î He rubbed one side of his chin, thoughtfully: ìItís flavor Iím talking about. Doesnít seem to have the right-î
Maynard made an effort to dismiss him: ìFlavor is dispensable temporarily. Theyíll be coming to us on our terms, these little-men-hordes of Earth, when they feel the pinch. We give up only this mysterious flavor, but they will have to give up atom-powered engines, farm machinery, and ground cars. It wouldnít be a bad idea, in fact, to attempt to get along without the Terrestrian flavors you are so concerned about. Let us appreciate the flavor of our home-grown products instead-which could stand comparison if we gave it a chance.î
ìThat so?î the Rhean smiled. ìI notice youíre smoking Earthgrown tobacco.î
ìA habit I can break if I have to.î
ìProbably by giving up smoking. I wouldnít use Outer World tobacco for anything but killing mosquitoes.î
He laughed a trifle too boisterously, and left the group. Maynard stared after him, a little pinch-nosed.
To Keilin, the little byplay over rye and tobacco brought a certain satisfaction. He regarded such personalities as the tiny reflection of certain Galactopolitical realities. Tethys and Rhea were the largest planets in the Galactic south, as Aurora was the largest in the Galactic north. All three planets were identically racist, identically exclusivist. Their views on Earth were similar and completely compatible. Ordinarily, one would think that there was no room to quarrel.
But Aurora was the oldest of the Outer Worlds, the most advanced, the strongest militarily-and, therefore, aspired to a sort of moral leadership of all the Worlds. That was sufficient in itself to arouse opposition, and Rhea and Tethys served as focal points for those who did not recognize Auroran leadership.
Keilin was somberly grateful for that situation. If Earth could but lean her weight properly, first in one direction, then in the other, an ultimate split, or even fragmentation
He eyed Maynard cautiously, almost furtively, and wondered what effect this would have on the next dayís debate. Already, the Auroran was more silent than was quite polite.
And then some under-secretary or sub-official threaded his way through the clusters of guests in finicking fashion, and beckoned to Maynard.
Keilinís following eyes watched the Auroran retreat with the newcomer, watched him listen closely, mouth a startled ìWhat!î that was quite visible to the eye, though too far off to be heard, and then reach for a paper that the other handed him.
And as a result, the next dayís session of the conference went entirely differently than Keilin would have predicted.
Keilin discovered the details in the evening video-casts. The Terrestrian government, it seemed, had sent a note to all the governments attending the conference. It warned each one bluntly that any agreement among them in military or economic affairs would be considered an unfriendly act against Earth and that it would be met with appropriate countermeasures. The note denounced Aurora, Tethys, and Rhea all equally. It accused them of being engaged in an imperialist conspiracy against Earth, and so on-and on-and on.
ìFools! gritted Keilin, all but butting his head against the wall out of sheer chagrin. ìFools! Fools! Fools!î And his voice died away still muttering that same, one word.
The next session of the conference was well and early attended by a set of angry delegates who were only too eager to grind into nothingness the disagreements still outstanding. When it ended, all matters concerning trade between Earth and the Outer Worlds had been placed in the hands of a commission with plenary powers.
Not even Aurora could have expected so complete and easy a victory, and Keilin, on his way back to Earth, longed for his voice to reach the video, so that it could be to others, and not to himself only, that he could shout his disgust.
Yet, on Earth, some men smiled.
Once back on Earth, the voice of Keilin slowly swirled under and down-lost in the noisier clamor that shouted for action.
His popularity sank in proportion as trade restrictions grew. Slowly, the Outer Worlds drew the noose tighter. First, they instituted a strict application of a new system of export licensing. Secondly, they banned the export to Earth of all materials capable of being ìused in a war effort.î And finally they applied a very broad interpretation indeed of what could be considered usable in such a connection.
Imported luxuries-and imported necessities, too, for that matter-vanished or priced themselves upwards out of the reach of all but the very few.
So the people marched, and the voices shouted and the banners swung about in the sunlight, and the stones flewat the consulates-
Keilin shouted hoarsely and felt as if he were going mad.
Until, suddenly, Luiz Moreno, quite of his own accord, offered to appear on Keilinís program and submit to unrestricted questioning in his capacity as ex-Ambassador to Aurora and present Secretary without Portfolio.
To Keilin it had had all the possibilities of a rebirth. He knew Moreno-no fool, he. With Moreno on his program, he was assured an audience as great as his greatest. With Moreno answering questions, certain misapprehensions might be removed, certain confusions might be straightened. The mere fact that Moreno wished to use his-his- program as sounding board might well mean that already a more pliant and sensible foreign policy might have been decided upon. Perhaps Maynard was correct, and the pinch was being felt and was working as predicted.
The list of questions had, of course, been submitted to Moreno in advance, but the ex-Ambassador had indicated that he would answer all of them, and any follow-up questions that might seem necessary.
It seemed quite ideal. Too ideal, perhaps, but only a criminal fool could worry over minutiae at this point.
There was an adequate ballyhoo-and when they faced one another across the little table, the red needle that indicated the number of video sets drawing power on that channel hovered well over the two hundred million mark. And there was an average of 2.7 listeners per video set. Now the theme; the official introduction.
Keilin rubbed his cheek slowly, as he waited for the signal.
Then, he began:
Q. Secretary Moreno, the question which interests all Earth at the moment, concerns the possibility of war. Suppose we start with that. Do you think there will be war?
A. If Earth is the only planet to be considered, I say: No, definitely not. In its history, Earth has had too much war, and has learned many times over how little can be gained by it.
Q. You say, ìIf Earth is the only planet to be considered-î Do you imply that factors outside our control will bring war?
A. I do not say ìwillî; but I could say ìmay.î I cannot, of course speak for the Outer Worlds. I cannot pretend to know their motivations and intentions at this critical moment in Galactic history. They may choose war. I hope not. If so be that they do, however, we will defend ourselves. But in any case, we will never attack; we will not strike the first blow.
Q. Am I right in saying, then, that in your opinion there are no basic differences between Earth and the Outer Worlds, which cannot be solved by negotiation?
A. You certainly are. If the Outer Worlds were sincerely desirous of a solution, no disagreement between them and us could long exist.
Q. Does that include the question of immigration?
A. Definitely. Our own role in the matter is clear and beyond reproach. As matters stand, two hundred million human beings now occupy ninety-five percent of the available land in the universe. Six billions-that is, ninety-seven percent of all mankind-are squeezed into the other five percent. Such a situation is obviously unjust and, worse, unstable. Yet Earth, in the face of such injustice, has always been willing to treat this problem as soluble by degrees. It is still so willing. We should agree to reasonable quotas and reasonable restrictions. Yet the Outer Worlds have refused to discuss this matter. Over a space of five decades, they have rebuffed all efforts on the part of Earth to open negotiations.
Q. If such an attitude on the part of the Outer Worlds continues, do you then think there will be war?
A. I cannot believe that this attitude will continue. Our government will not cease hoping that the Outer Worlds will eventually reconsider their stand on the matter; that their sense of justice and right is not dead, but only sleeping.
Q. Mr. Secretary, let us pass on to another subject. Do you think that the United Worlds Commission set up by the Outer Worlds recently to control trade with Earth represents a danger to peace?
A. In the sense that its actions indicate a desire on the part of the Outer Worlds to isolate Earth, and to weaken it economically, I can say that it does.
Q. To what actions do you refer, sir?
A. To its actions in restricting interstellar trade with Earth to the point where, in credit values, the total stands now at less than ten percent of what it did three months ago.
Q. But do such restrictions really represent an economic danger to Earth? For instance, is it not true that trade with the Outer Worlds represents an almost insignificant part of total Terrestrian trade? And is it not true that the importations from the Outer Worlds reach only a tiny minority of the population at best?
A. Your questions now are representative of a profound fallacy which is very common among our isolationists. In credit values, it is true that interstellar trade represents only five percent of our total trade, but ninety-five percent of our atomic engines are imported. Eighty percent of our thorium, sixty-five percent of our cesium, sixty percent of our molybdenum and tin are imported. The list can be extended almost indefinitely, and it is quite easy to see that the five percent is an extremely important, a vital, five percent. Furthermore, if a large manufacturer receives a shipment of atomic steel-shapers from Rhea, it does not follow that the benefit redounds only to him. Every man on Earth who uses steel implements or objects manufactured by steel implements benefits.
Q. But is it not true that the current restrictions on Earthís interstellar trade have cut our grain and cattle exports to almost nothing? And far from harming Earth, isnít this really a boon to our own hungry people?
A. This is another serious fallacy. That Earthís good food supply is tragically inadequate is true. The government would be the last to deny it. But our food exports do not represent any serious drain upon this supply. Less than one fifth of one percent of Earthís food is exported, and in return we obtain, for instance, fertilizers and farm machinery which more than make up for that small loss by increasing agricultural efficiency. Therefore, by buying less food from us, the Outer Worlds are engaged, in effect, in cutting our already inadequate food supply.
Q. Are you ready to admit, then, Secretary Moreno, that at least part of the blame for this situation should rest with Earth itself? In other words, we come to my next question: Was it not a diplomatic blunder of the first magnitude for the government to issue its inflammatory note denouncing the intentions of the Outer Worlds before those intentions had been made clear at the Interplanetary Conference?
A. I think those intentions were quite clear at the time.
Q. I beg pardon, sir, but I was at the conference. At the time the note was issued, there was almost a stalemate among the Outer World delegates. Those of Rhea and Tethys strongly opposed economic action against Earth, and there was considerable chance that Aurora and its block might have been defeated. Earthís note ended that possibility instantly.
A. Well, what is your question, Mr. Keilin?
Q. In view of my statements, do you or do you not think Earthís note to have been a criminal error of diplomacy which can now be made up only by a policy of intelligent conciliation?
A. You use strong language. However, I cannot answer the question directly, since I do not agree with your major premise. I cannot believe that the delegates of the Outer Worlds could behave in the manner you describe. In the first place, it is well known that the Outer Worlds are proud of their boast that the percentage of insanity, psychoses, and even relatively minor maladjustments of personality are almost at the vanishing point in their society. It is one of their strongest arguments against Earth, that we have more psychiatrists than plumbers and yet are more pinched for want of the former. The delegates to the conference represented the best of this so-stable society. And now you would have me believe that these demigods would, in a moment of pique, have reversed their opinions and instituted a major change in the economic policy of fifty worlds. I cannot believe them capable of such childish and perverse activity, and must therefore insist that any action they took was based not upon any note from Earth, but upon motivations that go deeper.
Q. But I saw the effect upon them with my own eyes, sir. Remember, they were being scolded in what they considered to be insolent language from an inferior people. There can be no doubt, sir, that as a whole, the men of the Outer Worlds are a remarkably stable people, despite your sarcasm, but their attitude toward Earth represents a weak point in this stability.
A. Are you asking me questions, or are you defending the racist views and policies of the Outer Worlds?
Q. Well, accepting your viewpoint that Earthís note did no harm, what good could it have done? Why should it have been sent?
A. I think we were justified in presenting our side of the question before the bar of Galactic public opinion. I believe we have exhausted the subject. What is your next question, please? It is the last, isnít it?
Q. It is. It has recently been reported that the Terrestrian government will take stern measures against those dealing in smuggling operations. Is this consistent with the governmentís view that lowered trade relations are detrimental to Earthís welfare?
A. Our primary concern is peace, and not our own immediate welfare. The Outer Worlds have adopted certain trade restrictions. We disapprove of them, and consider them a great injustice. Nevertheless, we shall adhere to them, so that no planet may say that we have given the slightest pretext for hostilities. For instance, I am privileged to announce here for the first time that in the past month, five ships, traveling under false Earth registry, were stopped while being engaged in the smuggling of Outer World materiel into Earth. Their goods were confiscated and their personnel imprisoned. This is an earnest of our good intentions.
Q. Outer World ships?
A. Yes. But traveling under false Earth registry, remember.
Q. And the men imprisoned are citizens of the Outer Worlds? A. I believe so. However, they were breaking not only our laws, but those of the Outer Worlds as well, and therefore doubly forfeited their interplanetary rights. I think the interview had better close, now.
Q. But this-
It was at this point that the broadcast came to a sudden end. The conclusion of Keilinís last sentence was never heard by anyone but Moreno. It ended like this:
ì-means war.î
But Luiz Moreno was no longer on the air. So as he drew on his gloves, he smiled and, with infinite meaning, shrugged his shoulders in a little gesture of indifference.
There were no witnesses to that shrug.
The Gathering at Aurora was still in session. Franklin Maynard had dropped out for the moment in utter weariness. He faced his son, whom he now saw for the first time in naval uniform.
ìAt least youíre sure of what will happen, arenít you?î
In the young manís response, there was no weariness at all, no apprehension; nothing but utter satisfaction. ìThis is it, dad!î
ìNothing bothers you, then? You donít think weíve been maneuvered into this.î
ìWho cares if we have? Itís Earthís funeral.î
Maynard shook his head: ìBut you realize that weíve been put in the wrong. The Outer World citizens they hold are law-breakers. Earth is within its rights.î
His son frowned: ìI hope youíre not going to make statements like that to the Gathering, dad I donít see that Earth is justified at all. All right, what if smuggling was going on? It was just because some Outer Worlders are willing to pay black market prices for Terrestrial food. If Earth had any sense, she could look the other way, and everyone would benefit. She makes enough noise about how she needs our trade, so why doesnít she do something about it? Anyway, I donít see that we ought to leave any good Aurorans or other Outer Worlders in the hands of those apemen. Since they wonít give them up, weíll make them. Otherwise, none of us will be safe next time.î
ìI see that youíve adopted the popular opinions, anyway.î
ìThe opinions are my own. If theyíre popular opinion also, itís because they make sense. Earth wants a war. Well, theyíll get it.î
ìBut why do they want a war, eh? Why do they force our hands? Our entire economic policy of the past months was only intended to force a change in their attitude without war.î
He was talking to himself, but his son answered with the final argument: ìI donít care why they wanted war. Theyíve got it now, and weíre going to smash them.î
Maynard returned to the Gathering, but even as the drone of debate re-filled the room, he thought, with a twinge, that there would be no Terrestrian alfalfa that year. He regretted the milk. In fact, even the beef seemed, somehow, to be just a little less savory
The vote came in the early hours of the morning. Aurora declared war. Most of the worlds of the Aurora bloc joined it by dawn.
In the history books, the war was later known as the Three Weeksí War. In the first week, Auroran forces occupied several of the trans-Plutonian asteroids, and at the beginning of the third week, the bulk of Earthís home fleet was all but completely destroyed in a battle within the orbit of Saturn by an Aurora fleet not one-quarter its size, numerically.
Declarations of war from the Outer Worlds yet neutral followed like the pop-pop of a string of firecrackers.
On the twenty-first day of the war, lacking two hours, Earth surrendered.
The negotiations of peace terms took place among the Outer Worlds. Earthís activities were concerned with signing only. The conditions of peace were unusual, perhaps unique, and under the force of an unprecedented humiliation, all the hordes of Earth seemed suddenly struck with a silence that came from a shamed anger too strong for words.
The terms mentioned were perhaps best commented upon by a voice on the Auroran video two days after they were made public. It can be quoted in part:
ìÖThere is nothing in or on Earth that we of the Outer Worlds can need or want. All that was ever worthwhile on Earth left it centuries ago in the persons of our ancestors.
ìThey call us the children of Mother Earth, but that is not so, for we are the descendants of a Mother Earth that no longer exists, a Mother that we brought with us. The Earth of today bears us at best a cousinly relation. No more.
ìDo we want their resources? Why, they have none for themselves. Can we use their industry or science? They are almost dead for lack of ours. Can we use their man power? Ten of them are not worth a single robot. Do we even want the dubious glory of ruling them? There is no such glory. As our helpless and incompetent inferiors, they would be only a drag upon us. They would divert from our own use food, labor, and administrative ability.
ìSo they have nothing to give us but the space they occupy in our thought. They have nothing to free us from but themselves. They cannot benefit us in any way other than in their absence.
ìIt is for that reason that the peace terms have been defined as they have been. We wish them no harm, so let them have their own solar system. Let them live there in peace. Let them mold their own destiny in their own way, and we will not disturb them there by even the least hint of our presence. But we in turn want peace. We in turn would guide our own future in our own way. So we do not want their presence. And with that end in view, an Outer World fleet will patrol the boundaries of their system, Outer World bases will be established on their outermost asteroids, so that we may make sure they do not intrude on our territory.
ìThere will be no trade, no diplomatic relationships, no travel, no communications. They are fenced off, locked out, hermetically sealed away. Out here we have a new universe, a second creation of Man, a higher Man
ìThey ask us: What will become of Earth? We answer: That is Earthís problem. Population growth can be controlled. Resources can be efficiently exploited. Economic systems can be revised. We know, for we have done so. If they cannot, let them go the way of the dinosaur, and make room.
ìLet them make room, instead of forever demanding room!î
And so an impenetrable curtain swung slowly shut about the Solar System. The stars in Earthís sky became only stars again, as in the long-dead days before the first ship had penetrated the barrier of lightís speed.
The government that had made war and peace resigned, but there was no one, really, to take their place. The legislature elected Luiz Moreno-ex-Ambassador to Aurora, ex-Secretary without Portfolio-as President pro tem, and the Earth as a whole was too numbed to agree or disagree. There was only a widespread relief that someone existed who would be willing to take the job of trying to guide the destinies of a world in prison.
Very few realized how well-planned an ending this was, or with what calculation Moreno found himself in the presidentís chair.
Ernest Keilin said hopelessly from the video screen: ìWe are only ourselves now. For us, there is no universe and no past-only Earth, and the future.î
That night he heard from Luiz Moreno once again, and before morning he left for the capital.
Morenoís presence seemed incongruent within the stiffly formal presidentís mansion. He was suffering from a cold again, and snuffled when he talked.
Keilin regarded him with a self-terrifying hostility; an almost singeing hatred in which he could feel his fingers begin to twitch in the first gestures of choking. Perhaps he shouldnít have come-Well, what was the difference; the orders had been plain. If he had not come, he would have been brought.
The new president looked at him sharply: ìyou have to alter your attitude toward me, Keilin. I know you regard me as one of the Gravediggers of Earth-isnít that the phrase you used last night?-but you must listen to me quietly for a while. In your present state of suppressed rage, I doubt if you could hear me.î
ìI will hear whatever you have to say, Mr. President.î
ìWell-the external amenities, at least. Thatís hopeful Or do you think a video-tracer is attached to the room?î
Keilin merely lifted his eyebrows.
Moreno said: ìIt isnít. We are quite alone. We must be alone; otherwise, how could I tell you safely that it is being arranged for you to be elected president under a constitution now being devised? Eh, whatís the matter?î
Then he grinned at the look of bloodless amazement in Keilinís face. ìOh, you donít believe it. Well, itís past your stopping. And before an hour is up, youíll understand.î
ìIím to be president?î Keilin struggled with a strange, hoarse voice. Then, more firmly: ìYou are mad.î
ìNo. Not I. Those out there, rather. Out there in the Outer Worlds.î There was a sudden vicious intensity in Morenoís eyes, and face, and voice, so that you forgot he was a little monkey of a man with a perpetual cold. You didnít notice the wrinkled, sloping forehead. You forgot the baldish head and ill-fitting clothes. There was only the bright and luminous look in his eyes, and the hard incision in his voice. That you noticed.
Keilin reached blindly backward for a chair, as Moreno came closer and spoke with increasing intensity.
ìYes,î said Moreno. ìThose out among the Stars. The godlike ones. The stately supermen. The strong, handsome master-race. They are mad. But only we on Earth know it.
ìCome, you have heard of the Pacific Project. I know you have. You denounced it to Cellioni once, and called it a fake. But it isnít a fake. And almost none of it is a secret. In fact, the only secret about it was that almost none of it was a secret.
ìYouíre no fool, Keilin. You just never stopped to work it all out. And yet you were on the track. You had the feel of it. What was it you said that time you were interviewing me on the program? Some. thing about the attitude of the Outer Worldling toward the Earthman being the only flaw in the formerís stability. That was it, wasnít it? Or something like that? Very well, then; good! You had the first third of the Pacific Project in your mind at the time, and it was no secret after all, was it?
ìAsk yourself, Keilin-what was the attitude of the typical Auroran to a typical Earthman? A feeling of superiority? Thatís the first thought, I suppose. But, tell me, Keilin, if he really felt superior, really superior, would it be so necessary for him to call such continuous attention to it? What kind of superiority is it that must be continuously bolstered by the constant repetition of phrases such as ëapemen,í ësubmen,í ëhalf-animals of Earth,í and so on? That is not the calm internal assurance of superiority. Do you waste epithets on earthworms? No, there is something else there.
ìOr let us approach it from another tack. Why do Outer World tourists stay in special hotels, travel in inclosed ground-cars, and have rigid, if unwritten, rules against social intermingling? Are they afraid of pollution? Strange, then, that they are not afraid to eat our food and drink our wine and smoke our tobacco.
ìYou see, Keilin, there are no psychiatrists on the Outer Worlds. The supermen are, so they say, too well adjusted. But here on Earth, as the proverb goes, there are more psychiatrists than plumbers, and they get lots of practice. So it is we, and not they, who know the truth about this Outer World superiority-complex, who know it to be simply a wild reaction against an overwhelming feeling of guilt.
ìDonít you think that can be so? You shake your head as though you disagree. You donít see that a handful of men who clutch a Galaxy while billions starve for lack of room must feel a subconscious guilt, no matter what? And, since they wonít share the loot, donít you see that the only way they can justify themselves is to try to convince themselves that Earthmen, after all, are inferior, that they do not deserve the Galaxy, that a new race of men have been created out there and that we here are only the diseased remnants of an old race that should die out like the dinosaur, through the working of inexorable natural laws?
ìAh, if they could only convince themselves of that, they would no longer be guilty, but merely superior. Only, it doesnít work; it never does. It requires constant bolstering; constant repetition, constant reinforcement. And still it doesnít quite convince.
ìBest of all, if only they could pretend that Earth and its population do not exist at all. When you visit Earth, therefore, avoid Earthmen; or they might make you uncomfortable by not looking inferior enough. Sometimes they might look miserable instead, and nothing more. Or worse still, they might even seem intelligent-as I did, for instance, on Aurora.
ìOccasionally, an Outer Worlder like Moreanu did crop up, and was able to recognize guilt for what it was without being afraid to say so out loud. He spoke of the duty the Outer Worlds owed Earth-and so he was dangerous to us. For if the others listened to him and had offered token assistance to Earth, their guilt might have been assuaged in their own minds; and that without any lasting help to Earth. So Moreanu was removed through our web-weaving, and the way left clear to those who were unbending, who refused to admit guilt, and whose reaction could therefore be predicted and manipulated.
ìSend them an arrogant note, for instance, and they automatically strike back with a useless embargo that merely gives us the ideal pretext for war. Then lose a war quickly, and you are sealed off by the annoyed supermen. No communication, no contact. You no longer exist to annoy them. Isnít that simple? Didnít it work out nicely?î
Keilin finally found his voice, because Moreno gave him time by stopping. He said: ìYou mean that all this was planned? You did deliberately instigate the war for the purpose of sealing Earth off from the Galaxy? You sent out the men of the Home Fleet to sure death because you wanted defeat? Why, youíre a monster, aÖa-î
Moreno frowned: ìPlease relax. It was not as simple as you think, and I am not a monster. Do you think the war could simply be instigated? It had to be nurtured gently in just the right way and to just the right conclusion. If we had made the first move, if we had been the aggressor, if we had in any way put the fault on our side-why, they of the Outer Worlds would have occupied Earth and ground it under. They would no longer feel guilty, you see, if we committed a crime against them. Or, again, if we fought a protracted war, or one in which we inflicted damage, they could succeed in shifting the blame.
ìBut we didnít. We merely imprisoned Auroran smugglers, and were obviously within our rights. They had to go to war over it because only so could they protect their superiority, which in turn protected them against the horrors of guilt. And we lost quickly. Scarcely an Auroran died. The guilt grew deeper and resulted in exactly the peace treaty our psychiatrists had predicted.
ìAnd as for sending men out to die, that is a commonplace in every war-and a necessity. It was necessary to fight a battle, and, naturally, there were casualties.î
ìBut why?î interrupted Keilin, wildly. ìWhy? Why? Why does all this gibberish seem to make sense to you? What have we gained? What can we possibly gain out of the present situation?î
ìGained, man? You ask what weíve gained? Why, weíve gained the universe. What has held us back so far? You know what Earth has needed these last centuries. You yourself once outlined it forcefully to Cellioni. We need a positronic robot society and an atomic power technology. We need chemical farming and we need population control. Well, whatís prevented that, eh? Only the customs of centuries which said robots were evil since they deprived human beings of jobs, that population control was merely the murder of unborn children, and so on. And worse, there was always the safety valve of emigration either actual or hoped-for.
ìBut now we cannot emigrate. Weíre stuck here. Worse than that, we have been humiliatingly defeated by a handful of men out in the stars, and weíve had a humiliating treaty of peace forced upon us. What Earthman wouldnít subconsciously burn for revenge? Self-preservation has frequently knuckled under to that tremendous yearning to ëget even.í
ìAnd that is the second third of the Pacific Project, the recognition of the revenge motive. As simple as that.
ìAnd how can we know that this is really so? Why, it has been demonstrated in history scores of times. Defeat a nation, but donít crush it entirely, and in a generation or two or three it will be stronger than it was before. Why? Because in the interval, sacrifices will have been made for revenge that would not have been made for mere conquest.
ìThink! Rome beat Carthage rather easily the first time, but was almost defeated the second. Every time Napoleon defeated the European coalition, he laid the groundwork for another just a little bit harder to defeat, until he himself was crushed by the eighth. It took four years to defeat Wilhelm of medieval Germany, and six much more dangerous years to stop his successor, Hitler.
ìThere you are! Until now, Earth needed to change its way of life only for greater comfort and happiness. A minor item like that could always wait. But now it must change for revenge, and that will not wait. And I want that change for its own sake.
ìOnly-I am not the man to lead. I am tarred with the failure of yesteryear, and will remain so until, long after I am bone-dust, Earth learns the truth. But youÖ .you, and others like you, have always fought for the road to modernization. You will be in charge. It may take a hundred years. Grandchildren of men unborn may be the first to see its completion. But at least you will see the start.
ìEh, what do you say?î Keilin was fumbling at the dream. He seemed to see it in a misty distance-a new and reborn Earth. But the change in attitude was too extreme. It could not be done just yet. He shook his head.
He said: ìWhat makes you think the Outer Worlds would allow such a change, supposing what you say to be true? They will be watching, I am sure, and they will detect a growing danger and put a stop to it. Can you deny that?î
Moreno threw his head back and laughed noiselessly. He gasped out: ìBut we have still a third left of the Pacific Project, a last, subtle and ironic third-
ìThe Outer Worlders call the men of Earth the subhuman dregs of a great race, but we are the men of Earth. Do you realize what that means? We live on a planet upon which, for a billion years, life-the life that has culminated in Mankind-has been adapting itself. There is not a microscopic part of Man, not a tiny working of his mind, that has not as its reason some tiny facet of the physical make-up of Earth, or of the biological make-up of Earthís other life-forms, or of the sociological make-up of the society about him.
ìNo other planet can substitute for Earth, in Manís present shape.
ìThe Outer Worlders exist as they do, only because pieces of Earth have been transplanted. Soil has been brought out there; plants; animals; men. They keep themselves surrounded by an artificial Earthborn geology which has within it, for instance, those traces of cobalt, zinc, and copper which human chemistry must have. They surround themselves by Earth-born bacteria and algae which have the ability to make those inorganic traces available in just the right way and in just the right quantity.
ìAnd they maintain that situation by continued imports-luxury imports, they call it-from Earth.
ìBut on the Outer Worlds, even with Terrestrian soil laid down to bedrock, they cannot keep rain from falling and rivers from flow ing, so that there is an inevitable, if slow, admixture with the native soil; an inevitable contamination of Terrestrian soil bacteria with the native bacteria, and an exposure, in any case, to a different atmosphere and to solar radiations of different types. Terrestrian bacteria disappear or change. And then plant life changes. And then animal life.
ìNo great change, mind you. Plant life would not become poisonous or nonnutritious in a day, or year, or decade. But already, the men of the Outer Worlds can detect the loss or change of the trace compounds that are responsible for that infinitely elusive thing we call ëflavor.í It has gone that far.
ìAnd it will go further. Do you know, for instance, that on Aurora, nearly one half the native bacterial species known have protoplasm based on a fluorocarbon rather than hydrocarbon chemistry? Can you imagine the essential foreignness of such an environment?
ìWell, for two decades now, the bacteriologists and physiologists of Earth have studied various forms of Outer World Life-the only portion of the Pacific Project that has been truly secret-and the transplanted Terrestrian life is already beginning to show certain changes on the subcellular level. Even among the humans.
ìAnd here is the irony. The Outer Worlders, by their rigid racism and unbending genetic policies are consistently eliminating from among themselves any children that show signs of adapting themselves to their respective planets in any way that departs from the norm. They are maintaining-they must maintain as a result of their own thought processes-an artificial criterion of ëhealthyí humanity, which is based on Terrestrian chemistry and not their own.
ìBut now that Earth has been cut off from them; now that not even a trickle of Terrestrian soil and life will reach them, change will be piled on change. Sicknesses will come, mortality will increase, child abnormalities will become more frequent-î
ìAnd then?î asked Keilin, suddenly caught up.
ìAnd then? Well, they are physical scientists-leaving such inferior sciences as biology to us. And they cannot abandon their sensation of superiority and their arbitrary standard of human perfection. They will never detect the change till it is too late to fight it. Not all mutations are clearly visible, and there will be an increasing revolt against the mores of those stiff Outer World societies. There will be a century of increasing physical and social turmoil which will prevent any interference on their part with us.
ìWe will have a century of rebuilding and revitalization, and at the end of it, we shall face an outer Galaxy which will either be dying or changed. In the first case, we will build a second Terrestrian Empire, more wisely and with greater knowledge than we did the first; one based on a strong and modernized Earth.
ìIn the second case, we will face perhaps ten, twenty, or even all fifty Outer Worlds, each with a slightly different variety of Man. Fifty humanoid species, no longer united against us, each increasingly adapted to its own planet, each with a sufficient tendency toward atavism to love Earth, to regard it as the great and original Mother.
ìAnd racism will be dead, for variety will then be the great fact of Humanity, and not uniformity. Each type of Man will have a world of its own, for which no other world could quite substitute, and on which no other type could live quite as well. And other worlds can be settled to breed still newer varieties, until out of the grand intellectual mixture, Mother Earth will finally have given birth not to merely a Terrestrian, but to a Galactic Empire.î
Keilin said, fascinated, ìYou foresee all this so certainly.î
ìNothing is truly certain; but the best minds on Earth agree on this. There may be unforeseen stumbling blocks on the way, but to remove those will be the adventure of our great-grandchildren. Of our adventure, one phase has been successfully concluded; and another phase is beginning. Join us, Keilin.î
Slowly, Keilin began to think that perhaps Moreno was not a monster after all



***



What interests me most about ìMother Earthî is that it seems to show clear premonitions of the novels Caves of Steel and The Naked Sun, which I was to write in the 1950s.
One thing about the story that I canít explain is the fact that I have two characters in it, one of whom is named Moreno and one Moreanu. I havenít the slightest idea why I used such similar names. There was no significance in it, I assure you, only carelessness. There was also a Maynard.
Somehow, in reading and rereading the manuscript, the sloppiness of the situation never struck me. It did, however, just as soon as I saw the story in print. Why Campbell didnít notice and make me change the names, I havenít the faintest idea.
I had no sooner sold ìMother Earthî than I began a new ìFoundationî story entitled ìÖAnd Now You Donít.î It was to be the last. Like ìThe Mule,î it was fifty thousand words long, and I didnít finish it till March 29, 1949. I submitted it to Campbell the next day and he took it at once. At two cents a word, it netted me a check for one thousand dollars, the first four-figure check I ever received.
It appeared as a three-part serial in the November 1949, December 1949, and January 1950 issues of Astounding, and it made up the final two thirds of my book Second Foundation.
By then, though, a great change was coming over the field of science fiction. The atom bomb had altered science fiction from a disregarded field of crazy stories into a literature of dreadful perception. Slowly, it was mounting in readership and esteem. New magazines were about to come into being, and the large publishing houses were about to consider putting out regular lines of hardback science fiction novels (hitherto the domain of small specialty houses no more affluent than the magazines and no more hopeful as a source of income).
The matter of hardback novels was of particular interest to Doubleday amp; Company, Inc. (though, of course, I didnít know it at the time).On February 5, 1949, while I was working on the last of the ìFoundationî stories, I attended a meeting of the Hydra Club-a group of science fiction professionals who lived in New York. There I met a Doubleday editor, Walter I. Bradbury, for the first time. It was he who was trying to build up a science fiction line for Doubleday, and he expressed some interest in ìThe Mule.î
I paid little attention to this, however. The thought of publishing a book, a real book, as opposed to magazine stories, was so outlandish that I simply couldnít cram it into my head.
But Fred Pohl could. He had been in the Army, serving in Italy and rising to the rank of sergeant. After discharge, he became an agent again. I had indignantly told him the story of Merwinís rejection of ìGrow Old with Me,î so when Bradbury continued searching, Pohl suggested to him that he look at that story of mine.
Bradbury was interested and, after considerable trouble, Pohl managed to pry the story out of me. (ìItís no good,î I kept saying-having never really recovered from the double rejection.)
But on March 24, 1949, I received the word that Bradbury wanted ìGrow Old with Meî if I would expand it to seventy thousand words. Whatís more, he paid me a $250 option, which I could keep even if the revision was unsatisfactory. That was the first time anyone had paid me anything in advance, and I was flabbergasted.
On April 6, I began the revision, and on May 25. 1949, I finished it and retitled it Pebble in the Sky. On May 29, Doubleday accepted it, and I had to grasp the fact that I was going to have a book published.
But even as I struggled with that, another change was taking place simultaneously.
There was still the matter of a job. All the time I was working for Professor Elderfield, I was still searching for one that I could take after that temporary position reached its natural end in May 1949. I was having no success at all.
But then, on January 13, 1949, Professor William C. Boyd of Boston University School of Medicine was visiting New York, and we met.
Professor Boyd was a science fiction reader of long standing and had liked my stories. For a couple of years we had been corresponding and we had grown quite friendly. Now he told me that there was an opening in the biochemistry department at his school and would I be interested? I was interested, of course, but Boston is twice as far from New York as Philadelphia is, and I hated to leave New York again.
I refused the offer, but not very hard.
And I continued to look for a job, and I continued to fail.
I therefore reconsidered my refusal of the position at Boston University School of Medicine and wrote a letter to Professor Boyd, saying that perhaps I might be interested, after all.
On March 9, 1949, I traveled to Boston for the first time in my life (on a sleeper-but I didnít sleep).I met Professor Burnham S. Walker, head of the department of biochemistry, the next day and he offered me a position on the faculty at five thousand per year. I saw no way out of my jobless dilemma but to accept.
Did I have to? Was there no chance that I might have made my living as a writer?
How could I honestly come to a decision that I could? In mid-1949, I had been writing for exactly eleven years. In all that time, my total earnings had come to $7,821.75, averaging a little over $710 per year, or $13.70 per week. In my better years, such as the seventh (mid-1944 to mid-1945, when I had sold four stories, including ìThe Muleî), I had earned $1,600, and in the tenth and eleventh together I had earned $3,300. It looked as though, even in good years, I could not count on much more than thirty dollars per week, and that just wasnít enough.
Of course, now that I was going to be publishing a book-
But books were unknown quantities. Besides, the book sale had come too late. By the time Bradbury accepted Pebble in the Sky, I was committed to the new job, and two days later, on June 1, 1949, I left for Boston.
It is at this point I must come to a halt, for the multiple changes put a final end to the first stage of my writing career.
I had left Campbell, this time forever. Oh, I saw him occasionally, and we corresponded, but the steady drizzle of near-weekly visits was never to take place again. Though I wrote for him and continued to publish in Astounding, new magazines appeared, including The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction in 1949, Galaxy Science Fiction in 1950, and others. My market broadened, and the word rate went up still further, to three cents and even four cents a word.
The appearance of my first book, Pebble in the Sky, on January 19, 1950, introduced a new dimension to my self-image, to my prestige in the field, and to my earnings. Other books followed-some new novels, some collections of older stories.
My position at Boston University School of Medicine led me to publish non-fiction. The first attempt was a textbook for medical students called Biochemistry and Human Metabolism. This was begun in 1950 in collaboration with Professors Walker and Boyd. It went through three editions and, though rather a failure, allowed me to discover that I enjoyed non-fiction writing at least as much as fiction writing and helped me start on a new phase of my writing career.
With all this taken into account, it is not surprising that my earnings as a writer began to rise rapidly almost as soon as I came to Boston. By 1952 I was making considerably more money as a writer than as a professor, and the discrepancy grew larger-in favor of writing-each succeeding year. By 1957, Iíd decided (still somewhat to my surprise) that I had been a writer all along and that that was all I was.
On July I, 1958, I gave up my salary and my duties but, with the agreement of the school, kept my title, which was then Associate Professor of Biochemistry. I keep that title to this day. I give an occasional lecture at the school when asked to do so, and I also lecture elsewhere when asked to do so (and charge a fee). For the rest, I became a full-time free-lance writer.
Writing is easy now, and is ever more satisfying. I keep what amounts to a seventy-hour week, if you count all the ancillary jobs of proofreading, indexing, research, and so on. I average seven or eight books a year, and this book, The Early Asimov, is my 125th book.
And yet, I must admit there has never been, since 1949, anything like the real excitement of those first eleven ìCampbell years,î when I wrote only in my spare time, and sometimes not even then, when every submission meant unbearable suspense, when every rejection meant misery and every acceptance ecstasy, and every fifty-dollar check was the wealth of Croesus.
And on July 11, 1971, John Campbell, at the still-early age of sixty-one, while watching television, died at 7:30 P.M. quietly and peacefully, Without any pain at all.
There is no way at all to express how much he meant to me and how much he did for me except, perhaps, to write this book evoking, once more, those days of a quarter century ago.



Isaac Asimov


The Early Asimov. Volume 2





or, Eleven Years of Trying







Introduction


The summer of 1939 was full of doubts and uncertainty for me.
In June I had graduated from Columbia and obtained my bachelor of science degree. So far, so good. However, my second round of attempts to enter medical school had failed, as the first had. To be sure, I hadn't really been anxious to go to medical school and I had tried only halfheartedly, but it still left me at loose ends.
What did I do now? I did not wish to look for some nondescript job, even if these were to be found, so I had to continue with my schooling. I had been majoring in chemistry, so, failing medical school, the natural next step was to go for my degree of doctor of philosophy in that field.
The first question was whether I would be able to swing this financially. (It would have been the first question, even more so, if I had gotten into medical school.) College itself had been touch and go all four years, and my small writing income of about $200 during my senior year had been a considerable help.
Naturally, I would have to continue writing and, just as naturally, my depression made it very difficult to write. I managed one story during that summer; it was called 'Life Before Birth.'
'Live Before Birth' was my first attempt at anything other than science fiction. It was in the allied field of fantasy (as imaginative as science fiction, but without the restriction of requiring scientific plausibility).
The reason for my attempting fantasy was that at the beginning of 1939, Street amp; Smith began the publication of a new magazine, Unknown, of which Campbell was editor.
Unknown caught my fancy at once. It featured stories of what are now called 'adult fantasy,' and the writing seemed to my nineteen-year-old self to be even more advanced and literate than that in Astounding. Of course I wanted desperately to place a story in this new and wonderful magazine.
'Life Before Birth' was an attempt in this direction, but aside from the mere fact that it was a fantasy, I remember nothing more about it. It was submitted to Campbell on July 11 and was back in my hands on the nineteenth. It never placed anywhere and no longer exists.
August was even worse. All Europe rang with the hideous possibility of war, and on September 1, World War II began with the German invasion of Poland. I could do nothing during the crisis but listen to the radio. It was not till September 11 that I could settle down long enough to start another story, 'The Brothers.'
'The Brothers' was science fiction, and all I remember is that it was about two brothers, a good one and an evil one, and a scientific invention that one or the other was constructing. On October 5 I submitted it to Campbell, and on October 11 it was rejected. It, too, never placed and no longer exists.
So the summer had passed fruitlessly and now I had to face another problem. Columbia University was not in the least anxious to take me on as a graduate student. They felt I was going to use the position as a mere way of marking time till I could try once more to get into medical school.
I swore that this was not so, but my position was vulnerable because as a premedical student I had not been required to take a course in physical chemistry and had therefore not done so. Physical chemistry was, however, required for graduate work in chemistry.
I persisted, and finally the admissions board made the following suggestion: I would have to take a full year's selection of graduate courses, and, at the same time, I would have to take physical chemistry and get at least a B in that. If I failed to get the B, I was out on my ear and my tuition money would, of course, not be refunded.
One of the members of the board told me, some years later, that I was offered this in the belief that I would not accept a set of terms so loaded against me. However, since I had never had trouble with passing courses, it never occurred to me that a set of requirements that merely asked that I achieve certain grades, was loaded against me.
I agreed, and when at the end of the first semester there were only three A's in physical chemistry out of a class of sixty, and I was one of them, the probation was lifted.
By December I had gotten deeply enough into my course work to be quite certain I would fulfill all grade requirements.
The only uncertainty remaining was financial. I had to get back to writing.
On December 21 I began 'Homo Sol' and completed it on January 1, 1940, the day before my twentieth birthday. I submitted it on January 4, and on that day, in Campbell 's office, I met Theodore Sturgeon and L. Ron Hubbard, two established members of Campbell 's stable of writers. (Hubbard has since then become world famous, in a fashion, as the originator of the cults of Dianetics and Scientology.)
There is no sign in my diary of any discouragement, but after a year and a half of assiduous efforts, I had failed to sell Campbell more than one story out of the eighteen I had by then written. He had rejected eight stories before buying 'Trends,' and he had rejected seven stories since. (Two stories, which I sold elsewhere, he never saw and had no chance to reject. Had he seen them he would certainly have rejected them.)
One factor in the lack of discouragement was Campbell 's unfailing interest. As long as he didn't get tired reading my stories and advising me about them so kindly, why should I get tired writing them? Then, too, my occasional sales to magazines other than Astounding (there had been six by then) and, especially, the opening up of a new and sympathetic market in the form of Pohl's magazines, helped keep my spirits up.
For 'Homo Sol,' my nineteenth story, there was no outright rejection. Again, Campbell asked for revisions. I had to revise it twice, but it was not to be another 'Black F.riar of the Flame.' The second revision was satisfactory, and on April 17, 1940, I received my second check from Campbell (and, by that time, my seventh check, all told). What's more, it was for seventy-two dollars, the story being 7,200 words long, and was the largest check I had ever received for a story up to that time.
Oddly enough, the clearest thing I remember about that check is an incident that took place that evening in my father's candy store, where I still worked every day and where I was to continue working for two more years. A customer took offense at my neglecting to say 'Thank you' after his purchase - a crime I frequently committed because, very often, I was working without conscious attention but was concentrating deeply on the plot permutations that were sounding hollowly within the cavern of my skull.
The customer decided to scold me for my obvious inattention and apparent lack of industry. 'My son,' he said, 'made fifty dollars through hard work last week. What do you do to earn a living?'
'I write,' I said, 'and I got this for a story today,' and I held up the check for him to see.
It was a very satisfactory moment.






Homo Sol [1]


The seven thousand and fifty-fourth session of the Galactic Congress sat in solemn conclave in the vast semicircular hall on Eon, second planet of Arcturus.
Slowly, the president delegate rose to his feet. His broad Arcturian countenance flushed slightly with excitement as he surveyed the surrounding delegates. His sense of the dramatic caused him to pause a moment or so before making the official announcement - for, after all, the entrance of a new planetary system into the great Galactic family is not a thing likely to happen twice in any one man's lifetime.
A dead silence prevailed during that pause. The two hundred and eighty-eight delegates - one from each of the two hundred and eighty-eight oxygen-atmosphere, water-chemistry worlds of the System - waited patiently for him to speak.
Beings of every manlike type and shape were there. Some were tall and polelike, some broad and burly, some short and stumpy. There were those with long, wiry hair, those with scanty gray fuzz covering head and face, others with thick, blond curls piled high and still others entirely bald. Some possessed long, hair-covered trumpets of ears, others had tympanum membranes flush with their temples. There were those present with large gazellelike eyes of a deep-purple luminosity, others with tiny optics of a beady black. There was a delegate with green skin, one with an eight-inch proboscis and one with a vestigial tail. Internally, variation was almost infinite.
But all were alike in two things.
They were all Humanoid. They all possessed intelligence.
The president delegate's voice boomed out then: 'Delegates! The system of Sol has discovered the secret of interstellar travel and by that act becomes eligible for entrance into the Galactic Federation.'
A storm of approving shouts arose from those present and the Arcturian raised a hand for silence.
'I have here,' he continued, 'the official report from Alpha Centauri, on whose fifth planet the Humanoids of Sol have landed. The report is entirely satisfactory and so the ban upon travel into and communication with the Solarian System is lifted. Sol is free, and open to the ships of the Federation. Even now, there is in preparation an expedition to Sol, under the leadership of Joselin Arn of Alpha Centauri, to tender that System the formal invitation into the Federation.'
He paused, and from tv/o hundred and eighty-eight throats came the stentorian shout: 'Hail, Homo Sol! Hail, Homo Sol! Hail!'
It was the traditional welcome of the Federation for all new worlds.
Tan Porus raised himself to his full height of five feet two -he was tall for a Rigellian - and his sharp, green eyes snapped with annoyance.
'There it is, Lo-fan. For six months that damned freak squid from Beta Draconis IV has stumped me.'
Lo-fan stroked his forehead gently with one long finger, and one hairy ear twitched several times. He had traveled eighty-five light years to be here on Arcturus II with the greatest psychologist of the Ferderation - and, more specifically, to see this strange mollusk whose reactions had stumped the great Rigellian.
He was seeing it now: a puffy, dull-purple mass of soft flesh that writhed its tentacular form in placid unconcern through the huge tank of water that held it. With unruffled serenity, it fed on the green fronds of an underwater fern.
'Seems ordinary enough,' said Lo-fan.
'Ha!' snorted Tan Porus. 'Watch this.'
He drew the curtain and plunged the room into darkness. Only a dim blue light shone upon the tank, and in the murk the Draconian squid could barely be discerned.
'Here goes the stimulus,' grunted Porus. The screen above his head burst into soft green light, focused directly upon the tank. It persisted a moment and gave way to a dull red and then almost at once to a brilliant yellow. For half a minute it shot raggedly through the spectrum and then, with a final glare of glowing white, a clear bell-like tone sounded.
And as the echoes of the note died away, a shudder passed over the squid's body. It relaxed and sank slowly to the bottom of the tank.
Porus pulled aside the curtain. 'It's sound asleep,' he growled. 'Hasn't failed yet. Every specimen we've ever had drops as if shot the moment that note sounds.'
'Asleep, eh? That's strange. Have you got the figures on the stimulus?'
'Certainly! Right here. The exact wave lengths of the lights required are listed, plus the length of duration of each light unit, plus the exact pitch of the sounded note at the end.'
The other surveyed the figures dubiously. His forehead wrinkled and his ears rose in surprise. From an inner pocket, he drew forth a slide rule.
'What type nervous system has the animal?'
'Two-B. Plain, simple, ordinary Two-B. I've had the anatomists, physiologists and ecologists check that until they were blue in the face. Two-B is all they get. Damn fools!'
Lo-fan said nothing, but pushed the center bar of the rule back and forth carefully. He stopped and peered closely, shrugged his shoulders and reached for one of the huge volumes on the shelf above his head. He leafed through the pages and picked out numbers from among the close print. Again the slide rule.
Finally he stopped. 'It doesn't make sense,' he said helplessly.
'I know that! I've tried six times in six different ways to explain that reaction - and I failed each time. Even if I rig up a system that will explain its going to sleep, I can't get it to explain the specificity of the stimulus.'
'It's highly specific?' questioned Lo-fan, his voice reaching the higher registers.
'That's the worst part of it,' shouted Tan Porus. He leaned forward and tapped the other on the knee. 'If you shift the wave length of any of the light units by fifty angstroms either way - any one of them - it doesn't sleep. Shift the length of duration of a light unit two seconds either way - it doesn't sleep. Shift the pitch of the tone at the end an eighth of an octave either way - it doesn't sleep. But get the right combination, and it goes straight into a coma.'
Lo-fan's ears were two hairy trumpets, stiffly erect. 'Galaxy!' he whispered. 'How did you ever stumble on the combination?'
'I didn't. It happened at Beta Draconis. Some hick college was putting its freshmen through a lab period on light-sound reactions of molluscoids - been doing it for years. Some student runs through his light-sound combinations and his blasted specimen goes to sleep. Naturally, he's scared out of his wits and brings it to the instructor. The instructor tries it again on another squid - it goes to sleep. They shift the combination -nothing happens. They go back to the original - it goes to sleep. After they fooled around with it long enough to know they couldn't make head or tail of it, they sent it to Arcturus and wished it on me. It's six months since 7 had a real night's sleep.'
A musical note sounded and Porus turned impatiently.
'What is it?'
'Messenger from the president delegate of Congress, sir,' came in metallic tones from the telecaster on his desk.
'Send him up.'
The messenger stayed only long enough to hand Porus an impressively sealed envelope and to say in hearty tone: 'Great news, sir. The system of Sol has qualified for entrance.'
'So what?' snorted Porus beneath his breath as the other left. 'We all knew it was coming.'
He ripped off the outer sheath of cello-fiber from the envelope and removed the sheaf of papers from within. He glanced through them and grimaced.
'Oh,Rigel!'
'What's wrong?' asked Lo-fan.
'Those politicians keep bothering me with the most inconse-quential things. You'd think there wasn't another psychologist on Eron. Look! We've been expecting the Solarian System to solve the principle of the hyperatomo any century now. They've finally done it and an expedition of theirs landed on Alpha Centauri. At once, there's a politician's holiday! We must send an expedition of our own to ask them to join the Federation. And, of course, we must have a psychologist along to ask them in a nice way so as to be sure of getting the right reaction, because, to be sure, there isn't a man in the army that ever gets proper training in psychology.'
Lo-fan nodded seriously. 'I know, I know. We have the same trouble out our way. They don't need psychology until they get Into trouble and then they come running.'
'Well, it's a cinch I'm not going to Sol. This sleeping squid is too important to neglect. It's a routine job, anyway - this business of raking in new worlds; a Type A reaction that any sophomore can handle.'
'Whom will you send?"
'I don't know. I've got several good juniors under me that can do this sort of thing with their eyes closed. I'll send one of them. And meanwhile, I'll be seeing you at the faculty meeting tomorrow, won't I?'
'You will - and hearing me, too. I'm making a speech on the finger-touch stimulus.'
'Good! I've done work on it, so I'll be interested in hearing what you have to say. Till tomorrow, then.'
Left alone, Porus turned once more to the official report on the Solarian System which the messenger had handed him. He leafed through it leisurely, without particular interest, and finally put it down with a sigh.
'Lor Haridin could do it,' he muttered to himself. 'He's a good kid - deserves a break.'
He lifted his tiny bulk out of the chair and, with the report under his arm, left his office and trotted down the long corridor outside. As he stopped before a door at the far end, the automatic flash blazed up and a voice within called out to him to enter.
The Rigellian opened the door and poked his head inside. 'Busy, Haridin?'
Lor Haridin looked up and sprang to his feet at once. 'Great space, boss, no! I haven't had anything to do since I finished work on anger reactions. You've got something for me, maybe?'
'I have - if you think you're up to it. You've heard of the Solarian System, haven't you?'
'Sure! The visors are full of it. They've got interstellar travel, haven't they?'
'That's right. An expedition is leaving Alpha Centauri for Sol in a month. They'll need a psychologist to do the fine work, and I was thinking of sending you.'
The young scientist reddened with delight to the very top of his hairless dome. 'Do you mean it, boss?'
'Why not? That is - if you think you can do it.'
'Of course I can.' Haridin drew himself up in offended hauteur. 'Type A reaction! I can't miss.'
'You'll have to learn their language, you know, and administer the stimulus in the Solarian tongue. It's not always an easy job.'
Haridin shrugged. 'I still can't miss. In a case like this, translation need only be seventy-five percent effective to get ninety-nine and six tenths percent of the desired result. That was one of the problems I had to solve on my qualifying exam. So you can't trip me up that way.'
Porus laughed. 'All right, Haridin, I know you can do it. Clean up everything here at the university and sign up for indefinite leave. And if you can, Haridin, write some sort of paper on these Solarians. If it's any good, you might get senior status on the basis of it.'
The junior psychologist frowned. 'But, boss, that's old stuff. Humanoid reactions are as well known asÖ as - You can't write anything on them.'
'There's always something if you look hard enough, Haridin. Nothing is well known; remember that. If you'll look at Sheet 25 of the report, for instance, you'll find an item concerning the care with which the Solarians armed themselves on leaving their ship.'
The other turned to the proper page. 'That's reasonable,' said he. 'An entirely normal reaction.'
'Certainly. But they insisted on retaining their weapons throughout their stay, even when they were greeted and welcomed by fellow Humanoids. That's quite a perceptible deviation from the normal. Investigate it - it might be worth while.'
'As you say, boss. Thanks a lot for the chance you're giving me. And say - how's the squid coming along?'
Porus wrinkled his nose. 'My sixth try folded up and died yesterday. It's disgusting.' And with that, he was gone.
Tan Porus of Rigel trembled with rage as he folded the handful of papers he held in two and tore them across. He plugged in the telecaster with a jerk.
'Get me Santins of the math department immediately,' he snapped.
His green eyes shot fire at the placid figure that appeared on the visor almost at once. He shook his fist at the image.
'What on Eron's the idea of that analysis you sent me just now, you Betelgeusian slime worm?'
The image's eyebrows shot up in mild surprise. 'Don't blame me, Porus. They were your equations, not mine. Where did you get them?'
'Never mind where I got them. That's the business of the psychology department.'
'All right! And solving them is the business of the mathematics department. That's the seventh set of the damnedest sort of screwy equations I've ever seen. It was the worst yet. You made at least seventeen assumptions which you had no right to make. It took us two weeks to straighten you out, and finally we boiled it down -'
Porus jumped as if stung. 'I know what you boiled it down to. I just tore up the sheets. You take eighteen independent variables in twenty equations, representing two months of work, and solve them out at the bottom of the last, last page with that gem of oracular wisdom - "a" equals "a". All that work - and all I get is an identity.'
'It's still not my fault, Porus. You argued in circles, and in mathematics that means an identity and there's nothing you can do about it.' His lips twitched in a slow smile. 'What are you kicking about, anyway? "A" does equal "a," doesn't it?'
'Shut up!' The telecaster went dead, and the psychologist closed his lips tightly and boiled inwardly. The light signal above the telecaster flashed to life again.
'What do you want now?'.
It was the calm, impersonal voice of the receptionist below that answered him. 'A messenger from the government, sir.'
'Damn the government! Tell them I'm dead.'
'It's important, sir. Lor Haridin has returned from Sol and wants to see you.'
Porus frowned. 'Sol? What Sol? Oh, I remember. Send him up, but tell him to make it snappy.'
'Come in, Haridin,' he said a little later, voice calmer, as the young Arcturian, a bit thinner, a bit more weary than he had been six months earlier when he left the Arcturian System, entered.
'Well, young man? Did you write the paper?'
The Arcturian gazed intently upon his fingernails. 'No, sir!'
'Why not?' Poms' green eyes peered narrowly at the other, 'Don't tell me you've had trouble.'
'Quite a bit, boss.' The words came with an effort. The psychological board itself has sent for you after hearing my report. The fact of the matter is that that the Solarian System hasÖ has refused to join the Federation.'
Tan Porus shot out of his chair like a jack-in-the-box and landed, purely by chance, on his feet.
'What!!'
Haridin nodded miserably and cleared his throat.
'Now, by the Great Dark Nebula,' swore the Rigellian, distractedly, 'if this isn't one sweet day! First, they tell me that "a" equals "a," and then you come in and tell me you muffed a Type A reaction - muffed it completely!'
The junior psychologist fired up. 'I didn't muff it. There's something wrong with the Solarians themselves. They're not normal. When I landed they went wild over us. There was a fantastic celebration - entirely unrestrained. Nothing was too good for us. I delivered the invitation before their parliament in their own language - a simple one which they call Esperanto. I'll stake my life that my translation was ninety-five percent effective.'
'Well? And then?'
'I can't understand the rest, boss. First, there was a neutral reaction and I was a little surprised, and then' - he shuddered in retrospect - 'in seven days - only seven days, boss - the entire planet had reversed itself completely. I couldn't follow their psychology, not by a hundred miles. I've brought home copies of their newspapers of the time in which they objected to joining with "alien monstrosities" and refused to be "ruled by inhumans of worlds parsecs away." I ask you, does that make sense?
'And that's only the beginning. It was light years worse than that. Why, good Galaxy, I went all the way into Type G reactions, trying to figure them out, and couldn't. In the end, we had to leave. We were in actual physical danger from thoseÖ those Earthmen, as they call themselves.'
Tan Porus chewed his lip a while. 'Interesting! Have you your report with you?'
'No. The psychological board has it. They've been going over it with a microscope all day.'
'And what do they say?'
The young Arcturian winced. 'They don't say it openly, but they leave a strong impression of thinking the report an inaccurate one.'
'Well, I'll decide about that after I've read it. Meanwhile, come with me to Parliamentary Hall and you can answer a few questions on the way.'
Joselin Arn of Alpha Centauri rubbed stubbled jaws with his huge, six-fingered hand and peered from under beetling brows at the semicircle of diversified faces that stared down upon him. The psychological board was composed of psychologists of a score of worlds, and their united gaze was not the easiest thing in the world to withstand.
'We have been informed,' began Frian Obel, head of the board and native of Vega, home of the green-skinned men, 'that those sections of the report dealing with Sol's military state are your work.'
Joselin Arn inclined his head in silent agreement.
'And you are prepared to confirm what you have stated here, in spite of its inherent improbability? You are no psychologist, you know.'
'No! But I'm a soldier!' The Centaurian's jaws set stubbornly as his bass voice rumbled through the hall. 'I don't know equations and I don't know graphs - but I do know spaceships. I've seen theirs and I've seen ours, and theirs are better. I've seen their first interstellar ship. Give them a hundred years and they'll have a better hyperatomos than we have. I've seen their weapons. They've got almost everything we have, at a stage in their history millennia before us. What they haven't got - they'll get, and soon. What they have got, they'll improve.
'I've seen their munitions plants. Ours are more advanced, but theirs are more efficient. I've seen their soldiers - and I'd rather fight with them than against them.
'I've said all that in the report. I say it again now.'
His brusque sentences came to an end and Frian Obel waited for the murmur from the men about him to cease.
'And the rest of their science; medicine, chemistry, physics? What of them?'
'I'm not the best judge of those. You have the report there of those who know, however, and to the best of my knowledge I confirm them.'
'And so these Solarians are true Humanoids?'
'By the circling worlds of Centauri, yes!'
The old scientist drew himself back in his chair with a peevish gesture and cast a rapid, frowning glance up and down the length.of the table.
'Colleagues,' he said, 'we make little progress by rehashing this mess of impossibilities. We have a race of Humanoids of a superlatively technological turn; possessing at the same time an intrinsically unscientific belief in supernatural forces, an incredibly childish predilection toward individuality, singly and in groups, and, worst of all, lack of sufficient vision to embrace a galaxy-wide culture.'
He glared down upon the lowering Centaurian before him. 'Such a race must exist if we are to believe the report - and fundamental axioms of psychology must crumble. But I, for one, refuse to believe any such - to be vulgar about it - comet gas. This is plainly a case of mismanagement to be investigated by the proper authorities. I hope you all agree with me when I say that this report be consigned to the scrap heap and that a second expedition led by an expert in his line, not by an inexperienced junior psychologist or a soldier -'
The drone of the scientist's voice was buried suddenly in the crash of an iron fist against the table. Joselin Arn, his huge bulk writhing in anger, lost bis temper and gave vent to martial wrath.
'Now, by the writhing spawn of Templis, by the worms that crawl and the gnats that fly, by the cesspools and the plague spots and by the hooded death itself, / won't allow this. Are you to sit there with your theories and your long-range wisdom and deny what I have seen with my eyes? Are my eyes' -'and they flashed fire as he spoke - 'to deny themselves because of a few wriggling marks your palsied hands trace on paper?
'To the core of Centauri with these armchair wise men, say I - and the psychologists first of all. Blast these men who bury themselves in their books and their laboratories and are blind to what goes on in the living world outside. Psychology, is it? Rotten, putrid -'
A tap on his belt caused him to whirl, eyes staring, fists clenched. For a moment, he looked about vainly. Then, turning his gaze downward, he found himself looking into the enigmatic green eyes of a pygmy of a man, whose piercing stare seemed to drench his anger with ice water.
'I know you, Joselin Arn,' said Tan Porus slowly, picking his words carefully. 'You're a brave man and a good soldier, but you don't like psychologists, I see. That is wrong of you, for it is on psychology that the political success of the Federation rests. Take it away and our Union crumbles, our great Federation melts away, the Galactic System is shattered.' His voice descended into a soft, liquid croon. 'You have sworn an oath to defend the System against all its enemies, Joselin Arn - and you yourself have now become its greatest. You strike at its foundations. You dig at its roots. You poison it at its source. You are dishonored. You are disgraced. You are a traitor.'
The Centaurian soldier shook his head helplessly. As Porus spoke, deep and bitter remorse filled him. Recollection of his words of a moment ago lay heavy on his conscience. When the psychologist finislied, Arn bent his head and wept. Tears ran down those lined, war-scarred cheeks, to which for forty years now they had been a stranger.
Porus spoke again, and this time his voice boomed like a thunder-clap: 'Away with your mewling whine, you coward. Danger is at hand. Man the guns!'
Joselin Arn snapped to attention; the sorrow that had filled him a bare second before was gone as if it had never existed.
The room rocked with laughter and the soldier grasped the situation. It had been Porus' way of punishing him. With his complete knowledge of the devious ins and outs of the Human-oid mind, he had only to push the proper button, and -
The Centaurian bit his lip in embarrassment, but said nothing.
But Tan Porus, himself, did not laugh. To tease the soldier was one thing; to humiliate him, quite another. With a bound, he was on a chair and laid his small hand on the other's massive shoulder.
'No offense, my friend - a little lesson, that is all. Fight the subhumanoids and the hostile environments of fifty worlds. Dare space in a leaky rattletrap of a ship. Defy whatever dangers you wish. But never, never offend a psychologist. He might get angry in earnest the next time.'
Arn bent his head back and laughed - a gigantic roar of mirth that shook the room with its earthquakelike lustiness.
'Your advice is well taken, psychologist. Bum me with an atomo, if I don't think you're right.' He strode from the room with his shoulders still heaving with suppressed laughter.
Porus hopped off the chair and turned to face the board.
'This is an interesting race of Humanoids we have stumbled upon, colleagues.'
'Ah,' said Obel, dryly, 'the great Porus feels bound to come to his pupil's defense. Your digestion seems to have improved, since you feel yourself capable of swallowing Haridin's report."
Haridin, standing, head bowed, in the corner, reddened angrily, but did not move.
Porus frowned, but his voice kept to its even tone. 'I do, and the report, if properly analyzed, will give rise to a revolution in the science. It is a psychological gold mine; and Homo Sol, the find of the millenium.'
'Be specific, Tan Porus,' drawled someone. 'Your tricks are all very well for a Centaurian blockhead, but we remain unimpressed.'
The fiery little Rigellian emitted a gurgle of anger. He shook one tiny fist in the direction of the last speaker.
'I'll be more specific, Inar Tubal, you hairy space bug.' Prudence and anger waged a visible battle within him. 'There is more to a Humanoid than you think - certainly far more than you mental cripples can understand. Just to show you what you don't know, you desiccated group of fossils, I'll undertake to show you a bit of psycho-technology that'll knock the guts right out of you. Panic, morons, panic! Worldwide panic!'
There was an awful silence. 'Did you say world-wide panic?' stuttered Frian Obel, his green skin turning gray. 'Panic?'
'Yes, you parrot. Give me six months and fifty assistants and I'll show you a world of Humanoids in panic.'
Obel attempted vainly to answer. His mouth worked in a heroic attempt to remain serious - and failed. As though by signal, the entire board dropped its dignity and leaned back in a single burst of laughter.
'I remember,' gasped Inar Tubal of Sirius, his round face streaked with tears of pure joy, 'a student of mine who once claimed to have discovered a stimulus that would induce worldwide panic. When I checked his results, I came across an exponent with a misplaced decimal point. He was only ten orders of magnitude out of the way. How many decimal points have you misplaced, Colleague Porus?'
'What of Kraut's Law, Porus, which says you can't panic more than five Humanoids at a time? Shall we pass a resolution repealing it? And maybe the atomic theory as well, while we're about it?' and Semper Gor of Capella cackled gleefully.
Porus climbed onto the table and snatched Obel's gavel. 'The next one who laughs is getting this over his empty head.' There was sudden silence.
'I'm taking fifty assistants,' shouted -the green-eyed Rigel-lian, 'and Joselin Arn is taking me to Sol. I want five of you to come with me - Inar Tubal, Semper Gor and any three others
óÖso that I can watch their stupid faces when I've done what I said I would.' He hefted the gavel, threateningly. 'Well?'
Frian Obel gazed at the ceiling placidly. 'All right, Porus. Tubal, Gor, Helvin, Prat and Winson can go with you. At the end of the specified time, we'll witness world-wide panic which will be very gratifying - or we'll watch you eat your words, and how much more gratifying that would be.' And with that, he chuckled very quietly to himself.
Tan Porus stared thoughtfully out the window. Terrapolis, capital city of Earth, sprawled beneath him to the very edge of the horizon. Its muted roar reached even to the half-mile height at which he stood.
There was something over that city, invisible and intangible but none the less real. Its presence was only too evident to the small psychologist. The choking cloak of dank fear that spread over the metropolis beneath was one of his own weaving - a horrible cloak of dark uncertainty, that clutched with clammy fingers at the hearts of Mankind and stopped short - just short
óÖof actual panic.
The roar of the city had voices in it, and the voices were tiny ones of fear.
The Rigellian turned away in disgust. 'Hey, Haridin,' he roared.
The young Arcturian turned away from the televisor. 'Calling me, boss?'
'What do you think I'm doing? Talking to myself? What's the latest from Asia?'
'Nothing new. The stimuli just aren't strong enough. The yellow men seem to be more stolid of disposition than the white dominants of America and Europe. I've sent out orders not to increase the stimuli, though.'
'No, they mustn't,' agreed Porus. 'We can't risk active panic.' He ruminated in silence. 'Listen, we're about through. Tell them to hit a few of the big cities - they're more susceptible -and quit.'
He turned to the window again. 'Space, what a world - what a world! An entirely new branch of psychology has opened up
óÖone we never dreamed of. Mob psychology, Haridin, mob psychology.' He shook his head impressively.
'There's lots of suffering, though, boss,' muttered the younger man. 'This passive panic has completely paralyzed trade and commerce. The business life of the entire planet is stagnant. The poor government is helpless - they don't know what's wrong.'
'They'll find out - when I'm ready. And, as for the suffering
óÖwell, I don't like it, either, but it's all a means to an end, a damned important end.'
There followed a short silence, and then Porus' lips twitched into a nasty smile. 'Those five nitwits returned from Europe yesterday, didn't they?'
Haridin smiled in turn and nodded vigorously. 'And hopping sore! Your predictions have checked to the fifth decimal place. They're fit to be tied.'
'Good! I'm only sorry I can't see Obel's face right now, after the last message I sent him. And, incidentally' - his voice dropped lower - 'what's the latest on them?'
Haridin raised two fingers. 'Two weeks, and they'll be here.'
'Two weeksÖ two weeks,' gurgled Porus jubilantly. He rose and made for the door. 'I think I'll find my dear, dear colleagues and pass the time of day.'
The five scientists of the board looked up from their notes and fell into an embarrassed silence as Porus entered.
The latter smiled impishly. 'Notes satisfactory, gentlemen? Found some fifty or sixty fallacies in my fundamental assumptions, no doubt?'
Hybron Prat of Alpha Cepheus rumpled the gray fuzz he called hair. 'I don't trust the unholy tricks this crazy mathematical notation of yours plays.'
The Rigellian emitted a short bark of laughter. 'Invent a better, then. So far, it's done a good job of handling reactions, hasn't it?'
There was an unmusical chorus of throat-clearings but no definite answer.
'Hasn't it?' thundered Porus.
'Well, what if it has,' returned Kim Winson, desperately. 'Where's your panic? All this is well and good. These Human-oids are cosmic freaks, but where's the big show you were going to put on? Until you break Kraut's Law, this entire exhibition of yours isn't worth a pinhead meteor.'
'You're beaten, gentlemen, you're beaten,' crowed the small master psychologist. 'I've proven my point - this passive panic is as impossible according to classic psychology as the active form. You're trying to deny facts and save face now, by harping on a technicality. Go home; go home, gentlemen, and hide under the bed.'
Psychologists are only human. They can analyze the motives that drive them, but they are the slave of those motives just as much as the commonest mortal of all. These galaxy-famous psychologists writhed under the lash of wounded pride and shattered vanity, and their blind stubbornness was the mechanical reaction due therefrom. They knew it was and they knew Porus knew it was - and that made it all the harder.
Inar Tubal stared angrily from red-rimmed eyes. 'Active panic or nothing, Tan Porus. That's what you promised, and that's what we'll have. We want the letter of the bond or, by space and time, we'll balk at any technicality. Active panic or we report failure!'
Porus swelled ominously and, with a tremendous effort, spoke quietly. 'Be reasonable, gentlemen. We haven't the equipment to handle active panic. We've never come up against this superf orm they have here on Earth. What if it gets beyond control?' He shook his head violently.
'Isolate it, then,' snarled Semper Gor. 'Start it up and put it out. Make all the preparations you want, but do it!'
'If you can,' grunted Hybron Prat.
But Tan Porus had his weak point. His brittle temper lay in splintered shards about him. His agile tongue blistered the atmosphere and inundated the sullen psychologist with wave after wave of concentrated profanity.
'Have your way, vacuumheads! Have your way and to outer space with you!' He was breathless with passion. 'We'll set it off right here in Terrapolis as soon as all the men are back home. Only you'd all better get from under!' And with one last parting snarl, he stalked from the room.
Tan Porus parted the curtains with a sweep of his hand, and the five psychologists facing him averted their eyes. The streets of Earth's capital were deserted, of civilian population. The ordered tramp of the military patrolling the highways of the city sounded like a dirge. The wintry sky hung low over the scene of strewn bodies - and silence; the silence that follows an orgy of wild destruction.
'It was touch and go for a few hours there, colleagues.' Porus' voice was tired. 'If it had passed the city limits, we could never have stopped it.'
'Horrible, horrible!' muttered Hybron Prat. 'It was a scene a psychologist would have given his right arm to witness - and his life to forget.'
'And these are Humanoids!' groaned Kim Winson.
Semper Gor rose to his feet in sudden decision. 'Do you see the significance of this, Porus? These Earthmen are sheer uncontrolled atomite. They can't be handled. Were they twice the technological geniuses they are, they would be useless. With their mob psychology, their mass panics, their superemotional-ism, they simply won't fit into the Humanoid picture.'
Porus raised an eyebrow. 'Comet gas! Individually, we are as emotional as they are. They carry it into mass action and we don't; that's the only difference.'
'And that's enough!' exclaimed Tubal. 'We've made our decision, Porus. We made it last night, at the height of theÖ theÖ of it. The Solar System is to be left to itself. It is a plague spot and we want none of it. As far as the Galaxy is concerned, Homo Sol will be placed in strict quarantine. That is final!'
The Rigellian laughed softly. 'For the Galaxy, it may be final. But for Homo Sol?'
Tubal shrugged. 'They don't concern us.'
Porus laughed again. 'Say, Tubal. Just between the two of us, have you tried a time integration of Equation 128 followed by expansion with Karolean tensors?'
'No-o. I can't say I have.'
'Well, then, just glance up and down these calculations and enjoy yourself.'
The five scientists of the board grouped themselves about the sheets of paper Porus had handed them. Expressions changed from interest to bewilderment and then to something approaching panic.
Naru Helvin tore the sheets across with a spasmodic movement. 'It's a lie,' he screeched.
'We're a thousand years ahead of them now, and by that time we'll be advanced another two hundred years!' Tubal snapped. 'They won't be able to do anything against the mass of the Galaxy's people.'
Tan Porus laughed in a monotone, which is hard to do, but very unpleasant to hear. 'You still don't believe mathematics. That's in your behaviour pattern, of course. All right, let's see if experts convince you - as they should, unless contact with these off-normal Humanoids has twisted you. Joselin - Joselin Arn - come in here!'
The Centaurian commander came in, saluted automatically, and looked expectant.
'Can one of your ships defeat one of the Sol ships in battle, if necessary?'
Arn grinned sourly. 'Not a chance, sir. These Humanoids break Kraut's Law in panic - and also in fighting. We have a corps of experts manning our ships; these people have a single crew that functions as a unit, without individuality. They manifest a form of fighting - panic, I imagine, is the best word. Every individual on a ship becomes an organ of the ship. With us, as you know, that's impossible.
'Furthermore, this world's a mass of mad geniuses. They have, to my certain knowledge, taken no less than twenty-two interesting but useless gadgets they saw in the Thalsoon Museum when they visited us, turned 'em inside out and produced from them some of the most unpleasant military devices I've seen. You know of Julmun Thill's gravitational line tracer? Used - rather ineffectively - for spotting ore deposits before the modern electric potential method came in?
"They've turned it - somehow - into one of the deadliest automatic fire directors it's been my displeasure to see. It will automatically lay a gun or projector on a completely invisible target in space, air, water or rock, for that matter.'
'We,' said Tan Porus, gleefully, 'have far greater fleets than they. We could overwhelm them, could we not?' Joselin Arn shook his head. 'Defeat them now - probably. It wouldn't be overwhelming, though, and I wouldn't bet on it too heavily. Certainly wouldn't invite it. The trouble is, in a military way, this collection of gadget maniacs invent things at a horrible rate. Technologically, they're as unstable as a wave in water; our civilization is more like a sanddune. I've seen their ground-car plants install a complete plant of machine tools for production of a new model of automobile - and rip it out in six months because it's completely obsolete!
'Now we've come in contact with their civilization briefly. We've learned the methods of one new civilization to add to our previous two hundred and eighty-odd - a small percentage advantage. They've added one new civilization to their previous one - a one-hundred-percent advance!'
'How about,' Porus asked gently, 'our military position if we simply ignore them completely for two hundred years?'
Joselin Arn gave an explosive little laugh. 'If we could -which means if they'd let us - I'd answer offhand and with assurance. They're all I'd care to tackle right now. Two hundred years of exploring the new tracks suggested by their brief contact with us and they'd be doing things I can't imagine. Wait two hundred years and there won't be a battle; there'll be an annexation.'
Tan Porus bowed formally. Thank you, Joselin Am. That Was the result of my mathematical work.'
Joselin Arn saluted and left the room.
Turning to the five thoroughly paralyzed scientists, Porus went on: 'And I hope these learned gentlemen still react in a vaguely Humanoid way. Are you convinced that it is not up to us to decide to end all intercourse with this race? We may -but they won't!
'Fools' - he spat out the word - 'do you think I'm going to waste time arguing with you? I'm laying down the law, do you understand? Homo Sol shall enter the Federation. They are going to be trained into maturity in two hundred years. And I'm not asking you; I'm telling you!' The Rigellian stared up at them truculently.
'Come with me!' he growled brusquely.
They followed in tame submission and entered Tan Porus' sleeping quarters. The little psychologist drew aside a curtain and revealed a life-size painting.
'Make anything of that?'
It was the portrait of an Earthman, but of such an Earthman as none of the psychologists had yet seen. Dignified and sternly handsome, with one hand stroking a regal beard, and the other holding the single flowing garment that clothed him, he seemed personified majesty.
'That's Zeus,' said Poms. 'The primitive Earthmen created him as the personification of storm and lightning.' He whirled upon the bewildered five. 'Does it remind you of anybody?'
'Homo Canopus?' ventured Helvin uncertainly.
For a moment, Porus' face relaxed in momentary gratification and then it hardened again. 'Of course,' he snapped. 'Why do you hesitate about it? That's Canopus to the life, down to the full yellow beard.'
Then: 'Here's something else.' He drew another curtain.
The portrait was of a female, this time. Full-bosomed and wide-hipped she was. An ineffable smile graced her face and her hands seemed to caress the stalks of grain that sprang thickly about her feet.
'Demeter!' said Porus. 'The personification of agricultural fertility. The idealized mother. Whom does that remind you of?'
There was no hesitation this time. Five voices rang out as one: 'Homo Betelgeuse!'
Tan Porus smiled in delight. 'There you have it. Well?'
'Well?'said Tubal.
'Don't you see?' The smile faded. 'Isn't it clear? Nitwit! If a hundred Zeuses and a hundred Demeters were to land on Earth as part of a "trade mission," and turned out to be trained psychologists - Now do you see?'
Semper Gor laughed suddenly. 'Space, time and little meteors. Of course! The Earthmen would be putty in the hands of their own personifications of storm and motherhood come to life. In two hundred years - why, in two hundred years, we could do anything.'
'But this so-called trade mission of yours, Porus,' interposed Prat. 'How would you get Homo Sol to accept it in the first place?'
Porus cocked his head to one side. 'Dear Colleague Prat,' he murmured, 'do you suppose that I created the passive panic just for the show - or just to gratify five woodenheads? This passive panic paralyzed industry, and the Terrestrial government is faced with revolution - another form of mob action that could use investigation. Offer them Galactic trade and eternal prosperity and do you think they'd jump at it? Has matter mass?'
The Rigellian cut short the excited babble that followed with an impatient gesture. 'If you've nothing more to ask, gentlemen, let's begin our preparations to leave. Frankly, I'm tired of Earth, and, more than that, I'm blasted anxious to get back to that squid of mine.'
He opened the door and shouted down the corridor: 'Hey, Haridin! Tell Arn to have the ship ready in six hours. We're leaving.'
'ButÖ but -' The chorus of puzzled objections crystallized into sudden action as Semper Gor dashed at Porus and snatched him back as he was on the point of leaving. The little Rigellian struggled vainly in the other's powerful grasp.
'Let go!'
'We've endured enough, Porus,' said Gor, 'and now you'll just calm down and behave like a Humanoid. Whatever you say, we're not leaving until we're finished. We've got to arrange with the Terrestrial government concerning the trade mission. We've got to secure approval of the board. We've got to pick our psychologist. We've got to -'
Here Porus, with a sudden jerk, freed himself. 'Do you suppose for one moment that I would wait for your precious board to start to begin to commence to consider doing something about the situation in two or three decades?
'Earth agreed to my terms unconditionally a month ago. The squad of Canopans and Betelgeusans set sail five months ago, and landed day before yesterday. It was only with their help that we managed to stop yesterday's panic - though you never suspected it. You probably thought you did it yourself. Today, gentlemen, they have the situation in full control and your services are no longer needed. We're going home.'



***



'Homo Sol' has a plot of a sort that particularly appealed to Campbell. Although the human beings in the story are far be-hind the other intelligences of the Galaxy, it is clear that there is something special about them, that they have an unusual ability to move ahead very quickly, and that everyone else had better watch out for them.
Campbell liked stories in which human beings proved themselves superior to other intelligences, even when those others were further advanced technologically. It pleased him to have human beings shown to possess a unique spirit of daring, or a sense of humor, or a ruthless ability to kill when necessary, that always brought them victory over other intelligences, even against odds.
I sometimes got the uncomfortable notion, however, that this attitude reflected Campbell 's feelings on the smaller, Earth scale. He seemed to me to accept the natural superiority of Americans over non-Americans, and he seemed automatically to assume the picture of an American as one who was of northwest European origin.
I cannot say that Campbell was racist in any evil sense of the term. I cannot recall any act of his that could be construed as unkind, and certainly he never, not once, made me feel uncomfortable over the fact that I was Jewish. Nevertheless, he did seem to take for granted, somehow, the stereotype of the Nordic white as the true representative of Man the Explorer, Man the Darer, Man the Victor.
I argued with him strenuously on the subject, or as violently as I dared, and in years to come our relationship was to be as nearly strained as it could be (considering our mutual affection, and all that I owed him) over the civil rights issue. I was on the liberal side of the issue, he on the conservative, and our minds never met on that subject.
All this had an important bearing on my science fiction work. I did not like Campbell 's attitude concerning humanity vis-a-vis other intelligences and it took two revisions of 'Homo Sol' before Campbell could move me close enough to what he wanted. Even then, he inserted several paragraphs, here and there, without consulting me, in the final version.
I tried to avoid such a situation in future. One way out was to depart from the traditions of those writers who wove plots against the gigantic web of entire galaxies containing many intelligences - notably those of E. E. Smith and of Campbell himself. Instead, I began to think of stories involving a galaxy populated by human intelligences only.
This came to fruit, soon enough, in the 'Foundation' series. Undoubtedly the Smith-Campbell view makes more sense. It is almost certain that among the hundreds of billions of worlds in a large galaxy there ought to be hundreds or even thousands of different intelligent species. That there should be only one, ourselves, as I postulated, is most unlikely.
Some science fiction critics (notably Sam Moskowitz) have given me credit for inventing the human-only galaxy, as though it were some kind of literary advance. Others may have thought privately (I have never heard it stated openly) that I had only human intelligences in my galaxy because I lacked the imagination to think up extraterrestrials.
But the fact is that I was only trying to avoid a collision with Campbell's views; I did not want to set up a situation in which I would be forced to face the alternatives of adopting Campbell's views when I found them repugnant and failing to sell a story (which I also found repugnant).
On March 25, 1940, the day I put through my final submission of 'Homo Sol,' I went on to visit Fred Pohl at his office. He told me that the response to 'Half-Breed' had been such that he felt justified in asking for a sequel. It was the first time I had ever been requested to write a specific story with acceptance virtually guaranteed in advance.
I spent April and May working on the sequel, 'Half-Breeds on Venus,' and submitted it to Pohl on June 3. On June 14, he accepted it The story was ten thousand words long, the longest I had ever sold up to that time. What's more, Pohl's magazines were doing so well that his budget had been increased and he was able to pay me five eighths of a cent a word for it -$62.50.
It appeared in the issue of Astonishing that reached the stands on October 24, 1940, two years almost to a day since my first sale. This was a red-letter day for me, too, since it was the first time that the cover painting on a magazine was ever taken from one of my stories. I had 'made the cover.'
The title of the story and my name were on the cover in bold letters. It was a flattering indication that my name could be counted on to sell magazines by this time.






Half-Breeds on Venus [2]


The damp, somnolent atmosphere stirred violently and shrieked aside. The bare plateau shook three times as the heavy egg-shaped projectiles shot down from outer space. The sound of the landing reverberated from the mountains on one side to the lush forest on the other, and then all was silent again.
One by one, three doors clanged open, and human figures stepped out in hesitant single file. First slowly, and then with impatient turbulence, they set first foot upon the new world, until the space surrounding the ships was crowded.
A thousand pairs of eyes gazed upon the prospect and a thousand mouths chattered excitedly. And in the other-world wind, a thousand crests of foot-high white hair swayed gracefully.
The Tweenies had landed on Venus!
Max Scanlon sighed wearily, 'Here we are!'
He turned from the porthole and slumped into his own special arm-chair. 'They're as happy as children - and I don't blame them. We've got a new world - one all for ourselves -and that's a great thing. But just the same, there are hard days ahead of us. I am almost afraid! It is a project so lightly embarked upon, but one so hard to carry out to completion.'
A gentle arm stole about his shoulder and he grasped it tightly, smiling into the soft, blue eyes that met his. 'But you're not afraid, are you, Madeline?'
'Certainly not!' And then her expression grew sadder, 'If only father had come with us. You - you know that he meant more to us than to the others. We were the - the first he took under his wing, weren't we?'
There was a long silence after that as each fell into deep thought.
Max.sighed, 'I remember him that day forty years-ago - old suit, pipe, everything. He took me in. Me, a despised halfbreed! And - and he found you for me, Madeline!'
'I know,' there were tears in her eyes. 'But he's still with us, Max, and always will be - here, and there.' Her hand crept first to her own heart and then to Max's.
'Hey, there, Dad, cateh her, catch her!'
Max whirled at the sound of his elder son's voice, just in time to catch up the little bundle of flying arms and legs that catapulted into him.
He held her gravely up before him, 'Shall I give you to your papa, Elsie? He wants you.'
The little girl kicked her legs ecstatically. 'No, no. I want you, grand-daddy. I want you to give me a piggy-back and come out with grandmamma to see how nice everything is.'
Max turned to his son, and motioned him sternly away, 'Depart, despised father, and let old grand-dad have a chance.'
Arthur laughed and mopped a red face, 'Keep her, for Heaven's sake. She's been leading me and the wife a merry chase outside. We had to drag her back by the dress to keep her from running off into the forest. Didn't we, Elsie?'
Elsie, thus appealed to, suddenly recalled a past grievance. 'Grand-daddy, tell him to let me see the pretty trees. He doesn't want me to.' She wriggled from Max's grasp and ran to the porthole. 'See them, grand-daddy, see them. It's all trees outside. It's not black anymore. I hated it when it was black, didn't you?'
Max leaned over and ruffled the child's soft, white hair gravely, 'Yes, Elsie, I hated it when it was black. But it isn't black anymore, and it won't ever be black again. Now go run to grandmamma. She'll get some cake specially for you. Go ahead, run!'
He followed the departing forms of his wife and granddaughter with smiling eyes, and then, as they turned to his son, they became serious once more.
'Well, Arthur?'
'Well, dad, what now?'
'There's no time to waste, son. We've got to start building immediately - underground!'
Arthur snapped into an attentive attitude, 'Underground!' He frowned his dismay.
'I know, I know. I said nothing of this previously, but it's got to be done. At all costs we must vanish from the face of the System. There are Earthmen on Venus - purebloods. There aren't many, it's true, but there are some. They mustn't find us - at least, not until we are prepared for whatever may follow. That will take years.'
'But father, underground!. To live like moles, hidden from light and air. I don't like that.'
'Oh, nonsense. Don't overdramatize. We'll live on the surface - but the city; the power-stations, the food and water reserves, the laboratories - all that must be below and impregnable.'
The old Tweenie gestured the subject away with impatience, 'Forget that, anyway. I want to talk about something else -something we've discussed already.'
Arthur's eyes hardened and he shifted his glance to the ceiling. Max rose and placed his hands upon his son's brawny shoulders.
'I'm past sixty, Arthur. How long I have yet to live, I don't know. In any case, the best of me belongs to the past and it is better that I yield the leadership to a younger, more vigorous person,.'
'Dad, that's sentimental bosh and you know it. There isn't one of us that's fit to wipe your shoes and no one is going to listen for a second to any plan of appointing a successor while you're still alive.'
'I'm not going to ask them to listen. It's done - and you're the new leader.'
The younger man shook his head firmly, 'You can't make me serve against my will.'
Max smiled whimsically, 'I'm afraid you're dodging responsibility, son. You're leaving your poor old father to the strains and hardships of a job beyond his aged strength.'
'Dad!' came the shocked retort. 'That's not so. You know it isn't. You -'
'Then prove it. Look at it this way. Our race needs active leadership, and I can't supply it. I'll always be here - while I live - to advise you and help you as best I can, but from now on, you must take the initiative.'
Arthur frowned and the words came from him reluctantly, 'All right, then. I take 'the job of field commander. But remember, you're commander-in-chief.'
'Good! And now let's celebrate the occasion.' Max opened a cupboard and withdrew a box, from which he abstracted a pair of cigars. He sighed, 'The supply of tobacco is down to the vanishing point and we won't have any more until we grow our own, but - we'll smoke to the new leader.'
Blue smoke curled upwards and Max frowned through it at his son, 'Where's Henry?'
Arthur grinned, 'Dunno! I haven't seen him since we landed. I can tell you with whom he is, though.'
Max grunted, 'I know that, too.'
'The kid's making hay while the sun shines. It won't be many years now, Dad, before you'll be spoiling a second set of grandchildren.'
'If they're as good as the three of my first set, I only hope I live to see the day.'
And father and son smiled affectionately at each other and listened in silence to the muted sound of happy laughter from the hundreds of Tweenies outside.
Henry Scanlon cocked his head to one side, and raised his hand for silence, 'Do you hear running water, Irene?'
The girl at his side nodded, 'Over in that direction.'
'Let's go there, then. A river flashed by just before we landed and maybe that's it.'
'All right, if you say so, but I think we ought to be getting back to the ships.'
'What for?' Henry stopped and stared. 'I should think you'd be glad to stretch your legs after weeks on a crowded ship.'
'Well, it might be dangerous.'
'Not here in the highlands, Irene. Venusian highlands are practically a second Earth. You can see this is forest and not jungle. Now if we were in the coastal regions -' He broke off short, as if he had just remembered something. 'Besides, what's there to be afraid of? I'm with you, aren't I?' And he patted the Tonite gun at his hip.
Irene repressed a sudden smile and shot an arch glance at her strutting companion, 'I'm quite aware that you're with me. That's the danger.'
Henry's chest deflated with an audible gasp. He frowned. 'Very funny - And I on my best behavior, too.' He drifted away, brooded sulkily awhile, and then addressed the trees in a distant manner, 'Which reminds me that tomorrow is Daphne's birthday. I've promised her a present.'
'Get her a reducing belt,' came the quick retort. 'Fat thing!'
'Who's fat? Daphne? Oh - I wouldn't say so.' He considered matters carefully, one thoughtful eye upon the young girl at his side. 'Now my description of her would be - shall we say - "pleasingly plump," or, maybe, "comfortably upholstered." '
'She's fat,' Irene's voice was suddenly a hiss, and something very like a frown wrinkled her lovely face, 'and her eyes are green.' She swung on ahead, chin high, and superbly conscious of her own little figure.
Henry hastened his steps and caught up, 'Of course, I prefer skinny girls any day.'
Irene whirled on him and her little fists clenched, 'I'm not skinny, you incredibly stupid ape.'
'But Irene, who said I meant you?' His voice was solemn, but his eyes were laughing.
The girl reddened to the ears and turned away, lower lip trembling. The smile faded from Henry's eyes and was replaced by a look of concern. His arm shot out hesitantly and slipped about her shoulder.
'Angry, Irene?'
The smile that lit her face of a sudden was as brilliant as the. sparkling sheen of her silvery hair in the bright sun,
'No,' she said.
Their eyes met and, for a moment, Henry hesitated - and found that he who hesitates is lost; for with a sudden twist and a smothered laugh, Irene was free once more.
Pointing through a break in the trees, she cried, 'Look, a lake!' and was off at a run.
Henry scowled, muttered something under his breath and ran after.
The scene was truly Earthly. A rapids-broken stream wound its way through banks of slender-trunked trees and then spread into a placid lake some miles in width. The brooding quiet was unbroken save by the muffled beat that issued from the throat-bags of the frilled lizards that nested in the upper reaches of the trees.
The two Tweenies - boy and girl - stood hand in hand upon the bank and drank in the beauty of the scene.
Then there was a muffled splash near by and Irene shrank into the encircling arms of her companion.
'What's the matter?'
'N-nothing. Something moved in the water, I think.'
'Oh, imagination, Irene.'
'No. I did see something. It came up and - oh, goodness, Henry, don't squeeze so tightly -'
She almost lost her balance as Henry suddenly dropped her altogether and jerked at his Tonite gun.
Immediately before them, a dripping green head lifted out of the water and regarded them out of wide-set, staring goggle-eyes. Its broad lipless mouth opened and closed rapidly, but not a sound issued forth.
Max Scanlon stared thoughtfully at the rugged foot-hills ahead and clasped his hands behind his back.
'You think so, do you?'
'Certainly, Dad,' insisted Arthur, enthusiastically. 'If we burrow under these piles of granite, all Earth couldn't get at us. It wouldn't take two months to form the entire cavern, with our unlimited power.'
'Hmph! It will require care!'
'It will get it!'
'Mountainous regions are quake regions.'
'We can rig up enough stat-rays to hold up all Venus, quakes or no quakes.'
'Stat-rays eat up energy wholesale, and a breakdown that will leave us energyless would mean the end.'
'We can hook up five separate power-houses - as foolproof as we can make them. All five won't break down at once.'
The old Tweenie smiled. 'All right, son. I see you've got it planned thoroughly. Go ahead! Start whenever you want -and remember, it's all up to you.'
'Good! Let's get back to the ships.' They picked their way gingerly down the rocky slope.
'You know, Arthur,' said Max, stopping suddenly, 'I've been thinking about those stat-beams.'
'Yes?' Arthur offered his arm, and the two resumed their walk.
'It's occurred to me that if we could make them two-dimensional in extent and curve them, we'd have the perfect defense, as long as our energy lasted - a stat-field.'
'You need four-dimensional radiation for that, Dad - nice to think about but can't be done.'
'Oh, is that so? Well, listen to this -'
What Arthur was to listen to remained hidden, however -for that day at least. A piercing shout ahead jerked both their heads upward. Up towards them came the bounding form of Henry Scanlon, and following him, at a goodly distance and a much more leisurely pace, came Irene.
'Say, Dad, I had a devil of a time finding you. Where were you?'
'Right here, son. Where were you?'
'Oh, just around. Listen, Dad. You know those amphibians the explorers talk about as inhabiting the highland lakes of Venus, don't you? Well, we've located them, lots of them, a regular convoy of them. Haven't we, Irene?"
Irene paused to catch her breath and nodded her head, 'They're the cutest things, Mr. Scanlon. All green.' She wrinkled her nose laughingly.
Arthur and his father exchanged glances of doubt. The former shrugged. 'Are you sure you haven't been seeing things? I remember once, Henry, when you sighted a meteor in space, scared us all to death, and then had it turn out to be your own reflection in the port glass.'
Henry, painfully aware of Irene's snicker, thrust out a belligerent lower lip, 'Say, Art, I guess you're looking for a shove in the face. And I'm old enough to give it to you, too.'
'Whoa there, quiet down,' came the peremptory voice of the elder Scanlon, 'and you, Arthur, had better learn to respect your younger brother's dignity. Now here, Henry, all Arthur meant was that these amphibians are as shy as rabbits. No one's ever caught more than a glimpse of them.'
'Well, we have, Dad. Lots of them. I guess they were attracted by Irene. No one can resist her.'
'I know you can't,' and Arthur laughed loudly.
Henry stiffened once more, but his father stepped between. 'Grow up, you two. Let's go and see these amphibians.'
'This is amazing," exclaimed Max Scanlon. 'Why, they're as friendly as children, I can't understand it.'
Arthur shook his head, 'Neither can I, Dad. In fifty years, no explorer has ever gotten a good look at one, and here they arc - thick as flies.'
Henry was throwing pebbles into the lake. 'Watch this, all of you.'
A pebble curved its way into the water, and as it splashed six green forms turned a back somersault and slid smoothly below the surface. With no time for a breath between, one was up again and the pebble arced back to fall at Henry's feet.
The amphibians were crowding closer in ever increasing numbers now, approaching the very edge of the lake, where they grasped at the coarse reeds on the bank and stared goggle-eyed at the Tweenies. Their muscular webbed legs could, be seen below the surface of the water, moving back and forth with lazy grace. Without cessation, the lipless mouths opened and closed in a queer, uneven rhythm.
'I think they're talking, Mr. Scanlon,' said Irene, suddenly.
'It's quite possible,' agreed the old Tweenie, thoughtfully. "Their brain-cases are fairly large, and they may possess considerable intelligence. If their voice boxes and ears are tuned to sound waves of higher or lower range than our own, we would be unable to hear them - and that might very well explain their Boundlessness.'
'They're probably discussing us as busily as we are them,' said Arthur.
'Yes, and wondering what sort of freaks we are,' added Irene.
Henry said nothing. He was approaching the edge of the lake with cautious steps. The ground grew muddy beneath his feet, and the reeds thick. The group of amphibians nearest turned anxious eyes toward him, and one or two loosened their hold and slipped silently away.
But the nearest held his ground. His wide mouth was clamped tight; his eyes were wary - but he did not move.
Henry, paused, hesitated, and then held out his hand, 'Hiya, Phib!'
The 'Phib' stared at the outstretched hand. Very cautiously, his own webbed forelimb stretched out and touched the Tweenie's fingers. With a jerk, they were drawn back, and the Phib's mouth worked in soundless excitement.
'Be careful,' came Max's voice from behind. 'You'll scare him that way. His skin is terribly sensitive and dry objects must irritate him. Dip your hand in the water.'
Slowly, Henry obeyed. The Phib's muscles tensed to escape at the slighest sudden motion, but none came. Again the Tweenie's hand was held out, dripping wet this time.
For a long minute, nothing happened, as the Phib seemed to debate within itself the future course of action. And then, after two false starts and hasty withdrawals, fingers touched again.
'Ataphib,' said Henry, and clasped the green hand in bis own.
A single, startled jerk followed and then a lusty return of pressure to an extent that numbed the Tweenie's fingers. Evidently encouraged by the first Phib's example, his fellows were crowding close now, offering hosts of hands.
The other three Tweenies slushed up through the mud now, and offered wetted hands in their turn.
'That's funny,' said Irene. 'Everytime I shake hands I seem to keep thinking of hair.'
Max turned to her, 'Hair?'
'Yes, ours. I get a picture of long, white hair, standing straight up and shining in the sun.' Her hand rose unconsciously to her own smooth tresses.
'Say!' interrupted Henry suddenly, 'I've been noticing that, too, now that you mention it. Only when I shake hands, though.'
'How about you, Arthur?' asked Max.
Arthur nodded once, his eyebrows climbing.
Max smiled and pounded fist into palm. 'Why, it's a primitive sort of telepathy - too weak to work without physical contact and even then capable of delivering only a few simple ideas.'
'But why hair, dad?' asked Arthur.
'Maybe it's our hair that attracted them in the first place. They've never seen anything like it and - and - well, who can explain their psychology?'
He was down on his knees suddenly, splashing water over his high crest of hair. There was a frothing of water and a surging of green bodies as the Phibs pressed closer. One green paw passed gently through the stiff white crest, followed by excited, if noiseless, chattering. Struggling among themselves for favored vantage-points, they competed for the privilege of touching the hair until Max, for sheer weariness, was forced to rise again.
'They're probably our friends for life now,' he said. 'A pretty queer set of animals.'
It was Irene, then, who noticed the group of Phibs a hundred yards from shore. They paddled quietly, making no effort to approach closer. 'Why don't they come?' she asked.
She turned to one of the foremost Phibs and pointed, making frantic gestures of dubious meaning. She received only solemn stares in return.
'That's not the way, Irene,' admonished Max, gently. He held out his hand, grasped that of a willing Phib and stood motionless for a moment. When he loosed his grip, the Phib slid into the water and disappeared. In a moment, the laggard Phibs were approaching shore slowly.
'How did you do it?' gasped Irene.
'Telepathy! I held on tightly and pictured an isolated group of Phibs and a long hand stretching out over the water to shake theirs.' He smiled gently, 'They are quite intelligent, or they would not have understood so readily.'
'Why, they're females,' cried Arthur, in sudden breathless astonishment. 'By all that's holy - they suckle their young!'
The newcomers were slenderer and lighter in color than the others. They advanced shyly, urged on by the bolder males and held out timid hands in greeting.
'Oh-h,' Irene cried in sudden delight. 'Look at this!'
She was down on her knees in the mud, arms outstretched to the nearest female. The other three watched in fascinated silence as the nervous she-Phib clasped its tiny armful closer to its breast.
But Irene's arms made little inviting gestures, 'Please, please. It's so cute. I won't hurt him.'
Whether the Phib mother understood is doubtful, but with a sudden motion, she held out a little green bundle of squirming life and deposited it in the waiting arms.
Irene rose, squealing with delight. Little webbed feet kicked aimlessly and round frightened eyes stared at her. The other three crowded close and watched it curiously.
'It's the dearest little thing, it is. Look at its funny little mouth. Do you want to hold it, Henry?'
Henry jumped backwards as if stung, 'Not on your life! I'd probably drop it.'
'Do you get any thought images, Irene?' asked Max, thoughtfully.
Irene considered and frowned her concentration, 'No-o. It's too young, mayb - oh, yes! It's - it's -' She stopped, and tried to laugh. 'It's hungry!'
She returned the little baby Phib to its mother, whose mouth worked in transports of joy and whose muscular arms clasped the little mite close. The tiny Phib swiveled its little green head to bend one last goggling look at the creature that had held it for an instant.
'Friendly creatures,' said Max, 'and intelligent. They can keep their lakes and rivers. We'll take the land and won't interfere with them.'
A lone Tweenie stood on Scanlon Ridge and his field-glass pointed at the Divide ten miles up the hills. For five minutes, the glass did not waver and the Tweenie stood like some watchful statue made of the same rock as formed the mountains all about.
And then the field-glass lowered, and the Tweenie's face was a pale thin-lipped picture of gloom. He hastened down the slope to the guarded, hidden entrance to Venustown.
He shot past the guards without a word and descended into the lower levels where solid rock was still being puffed into nothingness and shaped at will by controlled blasts of super-energy.
Arthur Scanlon looked up and with a sudden premonition of disaster, gestured the Disintegrators to a halt.
'What's wrong, Sorrell?'
The Tweenie leant over and whispered a single word into Arthur's ear.
'Where?'Arthur's voice jerked out hoarsely.
'On the other side of the ridge. They're coming through the Divide now in our direction. I spotted the blaze of sun on metal and -' he held up his field-glass significantly.
'Good Lord!' Arthur rubbed his forehead distractedly and then turned to the anxiously-watching Tweenie at the controls of the Disinto. 'Continue as planned! No change!'
He hurried up the levels to the entrance, and snapped out hurried orders, 'Triple the guard immediately. No one but me or those with me, are to be permitted to leave. Send out men to round up any stragglers outside immediately and order them to keep within shelter and make so unnecessary sound.'
Then, back again through the central avenue to his father's quarters.
Max Scanlon looked up from his calculations and his grave forehead smoothed out slowly.
'Hello, son. Is anything wrong? Another resistant stratum?'
'No, nothing like that.' Arthur closed the door carefully and lowered his voice. 'Earthmen!'
For a moment, Max made no movement. The expression on his face froze for an instant, and then, with a sudden exhalation, he slumped in his chair and the lines in his forehead deepened wearily.
'Settlers?'
'Looks so. Sorrell said women and children were among them. There were several hundred in all, equipped for a stay -and headed in this direction.'
Max groaned, 'Oh, the luck, the luck! All the vast empty spaces of Venus to choose and they come here. Come, let's get a firsthand look at this.'
They came through the Divide in a long, snaky line. Hardbitten pioneers with their pinched work-worn women and their carefree, half-barbarous, wilderness-bred children. The low, broad 'Venus Vans' joggled clumsily over the untrodden ways, loaded down with amorphous masses of household necessities.
The leaders surveyed the prospect and one spoke in clipped, jerky syllables, 'Almost through, Jem. We're out among the foothills now.'
And the other replied slowly, 'And there's good new growing-land ahead. We can stake out farms and settle down.' He sighed, 'It's been tough going this last month. I'm glad it's over!'
And from a ridge ahead - the last ridge before the valley -the Scanlons, father and son, unseen dots in the distance, watched the newcomers with heavy hearts.
The one thing we could not prepare for - and it's happened.'
Arthur spoke slowly and reluctantly, 'They are few and unarmed. We can drive them out in an hour.' With sudden fierceness, 'Venus is ours!'
'Yes, we can drive them out in an hour - in ten minutes. But they would return, in thousands, and armed. We're not ready to fight all Earth, Arthur.'
The younger man bit his lip and words were muttered forth half in shame, 'For the sake of the race, Father - we could kill them all.'
'Never!' exclaimed Max, his old eyes flashing. 'We will not be the first to strike. If we kill, we can expect no mercy from Earth; and we will deserve none.'
'But, Father, what else? We can expect no mercy from Earth as it is. If we're spotted, - if they ever suspect our existence, pur whole hegira becomes pointless and we lose out at the very beginning.'
'I know. I know.'
'We can't change now,' continued Arthur, passionately. 'We've spent months preparing Venustown. How could we start over?'
'We can't,' agreed Max, tonelessly. 'To even attempt to move would mean sure discovery. We can only -'
'Live like moles after all. Hunted fugitives! Frightened refugees! Is that it?'
'Put it any way you like - but we must hide, Arthur, and bury ourselves.'
'Until-?'
'Until I - or we - perfect a curved two-dimensional stat-beam. Surrounded by an impermeable defense, we can come out into the open. It may take years; it may take one week. I don't know.'
'And every day we run the risk of detection. Any day the swarms of purebloods can come down upon us and wipe us out. We've got to hang on by a hair day after day, week after week, month after month -'
'We've got to.' Max's mouth was clamped shut, and his eyes were a frosty blue.
Slowly, they went back to Venustown.
Things were quiet in Venustown, and eyes were turned to the topmost level and the hidden exits. Out there was air and the sun and space - and Earthmen.
They had settled several miles up the river-bed. Their rude houses were springing up. Surrounding land was being cleared.
Farms were being staked out. Planting was taking place.
And in the bowels of Venus, eleven hundred Tweenies shaped their home and waited for an old man to track down the elusive equations that would enable a stat-ray to spread in two dimensions and curve.
Irene brooded somberly as she sat upon the rocky ledge and stared ahead to where the dim gray light indicated the existence of an exit to the open. Her shapely legs swung gently back and forth and Henry Scanlon, at her side, fought desperately to keep his gaze f ocussed harmlessly upon air.
'You know what, Henry?'
'What?'
'I'll bet the Phibs could help us.'
'Help us do what, Irene?'
'Help us get rid of the Earthmen.'
Henry thought it over carefully, 'What makes you think that?'
'Well, they're pretty clever - cleverer than we think. Their minds are altogether different, though, and maybe they could fix it. Besides - I've just got a feeling.' She withdrew her hand suddenly, 'You don't have to hold it, Henry.'
Henry swallowed, 'I - I thought you had a sort of unsteady seat there - might fall, you know.'
'Oh!' Irene looked down the terrific three-foot drop. 'There's something hi what you say. It does look pretty high here.'
Henry decided he was in the presence of a hint, and acted accordingly. There was a moment's silence while he seriously considered the possibility of her feeling a bit chilly - but before he had quite decided that she probably was, she spoke again.
'What I was going to say, Henry, was this. Why don't we go out and see the Phibs?'
'Dad would take my head off if I tried anything like that.'
'It would be a lot of fun.'
'Sure, but it's dangerous. We can't risk anyone seeing us.'
Irene shrugged resignedly, 'Well, if you're afraid, we'll say no more about it.'
Henry gasped and reddened. He was off the ledge in a bound, 'Who's afraid? When do you want to go?'
'Right now, Henry. Right this very minute.' Her cheeks flushed with enthusiasm.
'All right then. Come on.' He started off at a half-run, dragging her along. - And then a thought occurred to him and he stopped short.
He turned to her fiercely, 'I'll show you if I'm afraid.' His arms were suddenly about her and her little cry of surprise was muffled effectively.
'Goodness,' said Irene, when in a position to speak once more. 'How thoroughly brutal!'
'Certainly. I'm a very well-known brute,' gasped Henry, as he uncrossed his eyes and got rid of the swimming sensation in his head. 'Now let's get to those Phibs; and remind me, when I'm president, to put up a memorial to the fellow who invented kissing.'
Up through the rock-lined corridor, past the backs of outward-gazing sentries, out through the carefully camouflaged opening, and they were upon the surface.
The smudge of smoke on the southern horizon was grim evidence of the presence of man, and with that in mind, the two young Tweenies slithered through the underbrush into the forest and through the forest to the lake of the Phibs.
Whether in some strange way of their own the Phibs sensed the presence of friends, the two could not tell, but they had scarcely reached the banks when approaching dull-green smudges beneath water told of the creatures' coming.
A wide, goggle-eyed head broke the surface, and, in a second, bobbing frogheads dotted the lake.
Henry wet his hand and seized the friendly forelimb outstretched to him.
'Hi there, Phib.'
The grinning mouth worked and made its soundless answer.
'Ask him about the Earthmen, Henry,' urged Irene. Henry motioned impatiently.
'Wait a while. It takes time. I'm doing the best I can.'
For two slow minutes, the two, Tweenie and Phib, remained motionless and stared into each other's eyes. And then the Phib broke away and, at some silent order, every lake-creature vanished, leaving the Tweenies alone.
Irene stared for a moment, nonplussed, 'What happened?'
Henry shrugged, 'I don't know. I pictured the Earthmen and he seemed to know who I meant. Then I pictured Earthmen fighting us and killing us - and he pictured a lot of us and only a few of them and another fight in which we killed them. But then I pictured us killing them and then a lot more of them coming - hordes and hordes - and killing us and then -'
But the girl was holding her hands to her tortured ears, 'Oh, my goodness. No wonder the poor creature didn't understand. I wonder he didn't go crazy.'
'Well, I did the best I could,' was the gloomy response. 'This was all your nutty idea, anyway.'
Irene got no further with her retort than the opening syllable, for in a moment the lake was crowded with Phibs once more. 'They've come back,' she said instead.
A Phib pushed forward and seized Henry's hand while the others crowded around in great excitement. There were several moments of silence and Irene fidgeted.
'Well?' she said.
'Quiet, please. I don't get it. Something about big animals, or monsters, or-' His voice trailed away, and the furrow between his eyes deepened into painful concentration.
He nodded, first abstractedly, then vigorously.
He broke away and seized Irene's hands. 'I've got it - and it's the perfect solution. We can save Venustown all by ourselves, Irene, with the help of the Phibs - if you want to come to the Lowlands with me tomorrow. We can take along a pair of Tonite pistols and food supplies and if we follow the river, it oughtn't to take us more than two or three days there and the same time back. What do you say, Irene?'
Youth is not noted for forethought. Irene's hesitation was for effect only, 'Well - maybe we shouldn't go ourselves, but -but I'll go - with you.' There was the lightest accent on the last word.
Ten seconds later, the two were on their way to Venustown, and Henry was wondering, if on the whole, it weren't better to put up two memorials to the fellow who invented kissing.
The flickering red-yellow of the fire sent back ruddy highlights from Henry's lordly crest of hair and cast shifting shadows upon his brooding face.
It was hot in the Lowlands, and the fire made it worse, yet Henry huddled close and kept an anxious eye upon the sleeping form of Irene on the other side. The teeming life of the Venusian jungle respected fire, and the flames spelt safety.
They were three days from the plateau now. The stream had become a lukewarm, slowly-moving river, the shores of which were covered with the green scum of algae. The pleasant forests had given way to the tangled, vine-looped growths of the jungle. The mingled sounds of life had grown in volume and increased to a noisy crescendo. The air became warmer and damper; the ground swampier; the surroundings more fantastically unfamiliar.
And yet there was no real danger - of that, Henry was convinced. Poisonous life was unknown on Venus, and as for the tough-skinned monsters that lorded the jungles, the fire at night and the Phibs during day would keep them away.
Twice the ear-splitting shriek of a Centosaur had sounded in the distance and twice the sound of crashing trees had caused the two Tweenies to draw together in fear. Both times, the monsters had moved away again.
This was the third night out, and Henry stirred uneasily. The Phibs seemed confident that before morning they could start their return trip, and somehow the thought of Venustown was rather attractive. Adventure and excitement are fine and with every passing hour the glory of his scintillating bravery grew in Irene's eyes - which was wonderful - but still Venus-town and the friendly Highlands were nice to think about.
He threw himself on his stomach and gazed morosely into the fire, thinking of his twenty years of age - almost twenty years.
'Why, heck,' he tore at the rank grass beneath. 'It's about time I was thinking of getting married.' And his eye strayed involuntarily to the sleeping form beyond the fire.
As if in response, there was a flickering of eyelids and a vague stare out of deep blue eyes.
Irene sat up and stretched.
'I can't sleep at all,' she complained, brushing futilely at her, white hair. 'It's so hot.' She stared at the fire distastefully.
Henry's good humor persisted. 'You slept for hours - and snored like a trombone.'
Irene's eyes snapped wide open, 'I did not!' Then, with a voice vibrant with tragedy, 'Did I?'
'No, of course not!' Henry howled his laughter, stopping only at the sudden, sharp contact between the toe of Irene's shoe and the pit of his own stomach. 'Ouch,' he said.
'Don't speak to me anymore, Mister Scanlon!' was the girl's frigid remark.
It was Henry's turn to look tragic. He rose in panicky dismay and took a simple step toward the girl. And then he froze in his tracks at the ear-piercing shriek of a Centosaur. When he came to himself, he found his arms full of Irene.
Reddening, she disentangled herself, and then the Cento-saurian shriek sounded again, from another direction, - and there she was, right back again.
Henry's face was pale, in spite of his fair armful. 'I think the Phibs have snared the Centosaurs. Come with me and I'll ask them.'
The Phibs were dim blotches in the gray dawn that was breaking. Rows and rows of strained, abstracted individuals were all that met the eye. Only one seemed to be unoccupied and when Henry rose from the handclasp, he said, 'They've got three Centosaurs and that's all they can handle. We're starting back to the Highlands right now.'
The rising sun found the party two miles up the river. The Tweenies, hugging the shore, cast wary eyes toward the bordering jungle. Through an occasional clearing, vast gray bulks could be made out. The noise of the reptilian shrieks was almost continuous.
'I'm sorry I brought you, Irene,' said Henry. 'I'm not so sure now that the Phibs can take care of the monsters.'
Irene shook her head. 'That's all right, Henry. I -wanted to come. Only - I wish we had thought of letting the Phibs bring the beasts themselves. They don't need us.'
'Yes, they do! If a Centosaur gets out of control, it will make straight for the Tweenies and they'd never get away. We've got the Tonite guns to kill the 'saurs with if the worst comes to the worst-' His voice trailed away and he glanced at the lethal weapon in his hand and derived but cold comfort thereform.
The first night was sleepless for both Tweenies. Somewhere, unseen in the backness of the river, Phibs took shifts and their telepathic control over the tiny brains of the gigantic, twenty-legged Centosaurs maintained its tenuous ho!d. Off in the jungle, three hundred-ton monsters howled impatiently against the force that drove them up the river side against their will and raved impotently against the unseen barrier that prevented them from approaching the stream.
By the side of the fire, a pair of Tweenies, lost between mountainous flesh on one side and the fragile protection of a telepathic web on the other, gazed longingly towards the Highlands some forty miles off.
Progress was slow. As the Phibs tired, the Centosaurs grew balkier. But gradually, the air grew cooler. The rank jungle growth thinned out and the distance to Venustown shortened.
Henry greeted the first signs of familiar temperate-zone forest with a tremulous sigh of relief. Only Irene's presence prevented him from discarding his role of heroism.
He felt pitifully eager for their quixotic journey to be over, but he only said, 'It's practically all over but the shouting. And you can bet there'll be shouting, Irene. We'll be heroes, you and I.'
Irene's attempt at enthusiasm was feeble. 'I'm tired, Henry. Let's rest.' She sank slowly to the ground, and Henry, after signalling the Phibs, joined her.
'How much longer, Henry?' Almost without volition, she found her head nestling wearily against his shoulder.
'One more day, Irene. Tomorrow this time, we'll be back.' He looked wretched, 'You think we shouldn't have tried to do this ourselves, don't you?'
'Well, it seemed a good idea at the time.'
'Yes, I know,' said Henry. 'I've noticed that I get lots of ideas that seem good at the time, but sometimes they turn sour.' He shook his head philosophically, 'I don't know why, but that's the way it is.'
'All I know,' said Irene, 'is that I don't care if I never move. another step in my life. I wouldn't get up now-'
Her voice died away as her beautiful blue eyes stared off toward the right. One of the Centosaurs stumbled into the waters of a small tributary to the stream they were following. Wallowing in the water, his huge serpentine body mounted on the ten stocky pairs of legs, glistened horribly. His ugly head weaved towards the sky and his terrifying call pierced the air. A second joined him.
Irene was on her feet. 'What are you waiting for, Henry. Let's go! Hurry!'
Henry gripped his Tonite gun tightly and followed.
Arthur Scanlon gulped savagely at his fifth cup of black coffee and, with an effort, brought the Audiomitter into optical focus. His eyes, he decided, were becoming entirely too balky. He rubbed them into red-rimmed irritation and cast a glance over his shoulder at the restlessly sleeping figure on the couch.
He crept over to her and adjusted the coverlet.
'Poor Mom,' he whispered, and bent to kiss the pale lips. He turned to the Audiomitter and clenched a fist at it, 'Wait till I get you, you crazy nut.'
Madeline stirred, 'Is it dark yet?'
'No,' lied Arthur with feeble cheerfulness. "He'll call before sundown, Mom. You just sleep and let me take care of things. Dad's upstairs working on that stat-field and he says he's making progress. In a few days everything will be all right.' He sat silently beside her and grasped her hand tightly. Her tired yes closed once more.
The signal light blinked on and, with a last look at his mother, he stepped out into the corridor, 'Well!'
The waiting Tweenie saluted smartly, 'John Barno wants to say that it looks as if we are in for a storm.' He handed over an official report.
Arthur glanced at it peevishly, 'What of that? We've had plenty so far, haven't we? What do you expect of Venus?'
'This will be a particularly bad one, from all indications. The barometer has fallen unprecedentedly. The ionic concentration of the upper atmosphere is at an unequalled maximum. The Beiilah River has overflowed its banks and is rising rapidly.'
The other frowned. 'There's not an entrance to Venustown that isn't at least fifty yards above river level. As for rain - our drainage system is to be relied upon.' He grimaced suddenly, 'Go back and tell Barno that it can storm for my part - for forty days and forty nights if it wants to. Maybe it will drive the Earthmen away.'
He turned away, but the Tweenie held his ground, 'Beg pardon sir, but that's not the worst. A scouting party today -'
Arthur whirled. 'A scouting party? Who ordered one to be sent out?'
'Your father, sir. They were to make contact with the Phibs, -I don't know why.'
'Well, go on.'
'Sir, the Phibs could not be located.'
And now, for the first time, Arthur was startled out of his savage ill-hum or, 'They were gone?'
The Tweenie nodded. 'It is thought that they have sought shelter from the coming storm. It is that which causes Barno to fear the worst.'
'They say rats desert a sinking ship,' murmured Arthur. He buried his head in trembling hands. 'God! Everything at once! Everything at once!'
The darkening twilight hid the pall of blackness that lowered over the mountains ahead and emphasized the darting flashes of lightning that flickered on and off continuously.
Irene shivered, 'It's getting sort of windy and chilly, isn't it?'
'The cold wind from the mountains. We're in for a storm, I guess,' Henry assented absently. 'I think the river is getting wider.'
A short silence, and then, with suddenly vivacity,. 'But look, Irene, only a few more miles to the lake and then we're practically at the Earth village. It's almost over.'
Irene nodded, 'I'm glad for all of us - and the Phibs, too.'
She had reason for the last statement. The Phibs were swimming slowly now. An additional detachment had arrived the day before from upstream, but even with those reinforcements, progress had slowed to a walk. Unaccustomed cold was nipping the multi-legged reptiles and they yielded to superior mental force more and more reluctantly.
The first drops fell just after they had passed the lake. Darkness had fallen, and in the blue glare of the lightning the trees about them were ghostly specters reaching swaying fingers toward the sky. A sudden flare in the distance marked the funeral pyre of a lightning-hit tree.
Henry paled. 'Make for the clearing just ahead. At a time like this, trees are dangerous.'
The clearing he spoke of composed the outskirts of the Earth village. The rough-hewn houses, crude and small against the fury of the elements, showed lights here and there that spoke of human occupancy. And as the first Centosaur stumbled out from between splintered trees, the storm suddenly burst in all its fury.
The two Tweenies huddled close. 'It's up to the Phibs,' screamed Henry, dimly heard above the wind and rain. 'I hope they can do it.'
The three monsters converged upon the houses ahead. They moved more rapidly as the Phibs called up every last line of mental power.
Irene buried her wet head in Henry's equally wet shoulder, 'I can't look! Those houses will go like matchsticks. Oh, the poor people!'
'No, Irene, no. They've stopped!'
The Centosaurs pawed vicious gouges out of the ground beneath and their screams rang shrill and clear above the noise of the storm. Startled Earthmen rushed from their cabins.
Caught unprepared - most having been roused from sleep -and faced with a Venusian storm and nightmarish Venusian monsters, there was no question of organized action. As they stood, carrying nothing but their clothes, they broke and ran.
There was the utmost confusion. One or two, with dim attempts at presence of mind, took wild, ineffectual pot-shots at the mountains of flesh before them - and then ran.
And when it seemed that all were gone, the giant reptiles surged forward once more and where once had been houses, there were left only mashed splinters.
'They'll never come back, Irene, they'll never come back.' Henry was breathless at the success of his plan. 'We're heroes now, and -' His voice rose to a hoarse shriek, 'Irene, get back! Make for the trees!'
The Centosaurian howls had taken on a deeper note. The nearest one reared onto his two hindmost pairs of legs and his great head, two hundred feet above ground, was silhouetted horribly against the lightning. With a rumbling thud, he came down on all feet again and made for the river - which under the lash of the storm was now a raging flood.
The Phibs had lost control!
Henry's Tonite gun flashed into quick action as he shoved Irene away. She, however, backed away slowly and brought her own gun into line.
The ball of purple light that meant a hit blazed into being and the nearest Centosaur screamed in agony as its mighty tail threshed aside the surrounding trees. Blindly, the hole where once a leg had been gushing blood, it charged.
A second glare of purple and it was down with an earth-shaking thud, its last shriek reaching a crescendo of shrill frightfulness.
But the other two monsters were crashing toward them. They blundered blindly toward the source of the power that had held them captive almost a week; driving violently with all the force of their mindless hate to the river. And in the path of the Juggernauts were the two Tweenies.
The boiling torrent was at their backs. The forest was a groaning wilderness of splintered trees and ear-splitting sound.
Then, suddenly, the report of Tonite guns sounded from the distance. Purple glares - a flurry of threshing - spasmodic shrieking - and then a silence in which even the wind, as if overawed by recent events, held its peace momentarily.
Henry yelled his glee and performed an impromptu war-dance. 'They've come from Venustown, Irene,' he shouted. 'They've got the Centosaurs and everything's finished! We've saved the Tweenies!'
It happened in a breath's time. Irene had dropped her gun and sobbed her relief. She was running to Henry and then she-tripped - and the river had her.
'Henry!' The wind whipped the sound away.
For one dreadful moment, Henry found himself incapable of motion. He could only stare stupidly, unbelievingly, at the spot where Irene had been, and then he was in the water. He plunged into the surrounding backness desperately.
'Irene!' He caught his breath with difficulty. The current drove him on.
'Irene!' No sound but the wind. His efforts at swimming were futile. He couldn't even break surface for more than a second at a time, his lungs were bursting.
'Irene!' There was no answer. Nothing but rushing water and darkness.
And then something touched him. He lashed out at it instinctively, but the grip tightened. He felt himself borne up into the air. His tortured lungs breathed in gasps. A grinning Phib face stared into his and after that there was nothing but confused impressions of cold, dark wetness.
He became aware of his surroundings by stages. First, that he was sitting on a blanket under the trees, with other blankets wrapped tightly about him. Then, he felt the warm radiation of the heat-lamps upon him and the illumination of Atomo bulbs. People were crowding close and he noticed that it was no longer raining.
He stared about him hazily and then, 'Irene!'
She was beside him, as wrapped up as he, and smiling feebly, 'I'm all right, Henry. The Phibs dragged me back, too.'
Madeline was bending over him and he swallowed the hot coffee placed to his lips. 'The Phibs have told us of what you two have helped them do. We're all proud of you, son - you and Irene.'
Max's smile transfigured his face into the picture of paternal pride, 'The psychology you used was perfect. Venus is too vast and has too many friendly areas to expect Earthmen to return to places that have shown themselves to be infested with Cen-tosaurs - not for a good long while. And when they do come back, we shall have our stat-field.'
Arthur Scanlon hurried up out of the gloom. He thwacked Henry on the shoulder and then wrong Irene's hand. 'Your guardian and I," he told her, 'are fixing up a celebration for day after tomorrow, so get good and rested. It's going to be the greatest thing you ever saw.'
Henry spoke up, 'Celebration, huh? Well, I'll tell you what you can do. After it's over, you can announce an engagement.'
'An engagement?' Madeline sat up and looked interested. 'What do you mean?'
'An engagement - to be married,' came the impatient answer. 'I'm old enough, I suppose. Today proves it!'
Irene's eyes bent in furious concentration upon the grass, 'With whom, Henry?'
'Huh? With you, of course. Gosh, who else could it be?'
'But you haven't asked me.' The words were uttered slowly and with great firmness.
For a moment Henry flushed, and then his jaws grew grim, 'Well, I'm not going to. I'm telling you! And what are you going to do about it?'
He leaned close to her and Max Scanlon chuckled and motioned the others away. On tip-toes, they left.
A dim shape hobbled into view and the two Tweenies separated in confusion. They had forgotten the others.
But it wasn't another Tweenie. 'Why - why, it's a Phib!' cried Irene.
He limped his ungainly way across the wet grass, with the inexpert aid of his muscular arms. Approaching, he flopped wearily on his stomach and extended his forearms.
His purpose was plain. Irene and Henry grasped a hand apiece. There was silence a moment or two and the Phib's great eyes glinted solemnly in the light of the Atomo lamps. Then there was a sudden squeal of embarrassment from Irene and a shy laugh from Henry. Contact was broken.
'Did you get the same thing I did?' asked Henry.
Irene was red, 'Yes, a long row of little baby Phibs, maybe fifteen -'
'Or twenty,' said Henry.
'- with long white hair!'



***



The story, not surprisingly, reflects my personal situation at the time. I had gone to a boys' high school and to a boys' college. Now that I was in graduate school, however, the surroundings were, for the first time, coeducational.
In the fall of 1939, I discovered that a beautiful blond girl had the desk next to mine in the laboratory of my course in synthetic organic chemistry. Naturally I was attracted.
I persuaded her to go out with me on simple dates, the very first being on my twentieth birthday, when I took her to Radio City Music Hall. For five months, I mooned after her with feckless romanticism.
At the end of the school year, though, she had earned her master of arts degree and, having decided not to go on for her doctorate, left school and took a job in Wilmington, Delaware, leaving me behind, woebegone and stricken.
I got over it, of course, but while she was still at school I wrote 'Half-Breeds on Venus.' Of all the stories I had yet written, it was the most heavily boy-and-girl. The heroine's name was Irene, which was the name of my pretty blond lab neighbor.
Merely having a few dates on the hand-holding level did not, however, perform the magic required to make me capable of handling passion in literature, and I continued to use girls sparingly in later stories - and a good thing, too, I think. ï
The success of 'Half-Breeds on Venus' made the notion of writing sequels generally seem a good idea. A sequel to a successful story must, after all, be a reasonably sure sale. So even while I was working on 'Half-Breeds on Venus,' I suggested to Campbell that I write a sequel to 'Homo Sol.'
Campbell's enthusiasm was moderate, but he was willing to look at such a sequel if I were to write it. I did write it as soon as 'Half-Breeds on Venus' was done and called it 'The Imaginary.' Although it used one of the chief characters of 'Homo Sol,' the human-nonhuman confrontation was absent, which probably didn't help it as far as Campbell was concerned. I submitted it to him on June 11, and received it back - a rejection, sequel or no sequel - on June 19.
Pohl rejected it, too. Tremaine read it with more sympathy and was thinking of taking it for Comet, I heard, but that magazine ceased publication and the story was back on the market. Actually, I retired it, but two years later I sold it to Pohl's magazine after all - but at a time when Pohl was no longer editor.
But though I had my troubles and didn't click every time, or even right away, I did manage to make $272 during my first year as a graduate student, and that was an enormous help.






The Imaginary [3]


The telecaster flashed its fitful signal, while Tan Porus sat by complacently. His sharp, green eyes glittered their triumph, and his tiny body was vibrant with excitement. Nothing could have better indicated the greatness of the occasion than his extraordinary position - Tan Porus had his feet on the desk!
The 'caster glowed into life and a broad Arcturian countenance frowned fretfully out at the Rigellian psychologist
'Do you have to drag me here straight from bed, Porus? It's the middle of the night!'
'It's broad daylight in this part of the world, Final. But I've got something to tell you that'll make you forget all about sleep.'
Gar Final, editor of the J.G.P. - Journal of Galactic Psychology - allowed a look of alertness to cross his face. Whatever Tan Porus's faults - and Arcturus knew they were many -he had never issued a false alarm. If he said something great was in the air, it was not merely great - it was colossal!
It was quite evident that Porus was enjoying himself. 'Final,' he said, 'the next article I send to your rag is going to be the greatest thing you've ever printed.'
Final was impressed. 'Do you really mean what you say?' he asked idiotically.
'What kind of a stupid question is that? Of course I do. Listen -' There followed a dramatic silence, while the tenseness on Final's face reached painful proportions. Then came Porus's husky whisper - 'I've solved the problem of the squid!'
Of course the reaction was exactly what Porus had expected. There was a blow-up at the other end, and for thirty interesting seconds the Rigellian was surprised to learn that the staid and respectable Final had a blistering vocabulary.
Porus's squid was a by-word throughout the galaxy. For two years now, he had been fussing over an obscure Draconian animal that persisted in going to sleep when it wasn't supposed to. He had set up equations and torn them down with a regularity that had become a standing joke with every psychologist in the Federation - and none had explained the unusual reaction. Now Final had been dragged from bed to be told that the solution had been reached - and that was all.
Final ripped out a concluding phrase that all but put the 'caster out of commission.
Porus waited for the storm to pass and then said calmly, 'But do you know how I solved it?'
The other's answer was an indistinct mumble.
The Rigellian began speaking rapidly. All traces of amusement had left his face and, after a few sentences, all traces of anger left Final's.
The Arcturian's expression became one of wide-eyed interest. 'No?' he gasped.
'Yes!'
When Porus had finished, Final raced madly to put in rush calls to the printers to delay publication of the coming issue of the J.G.P. for two weeks.
Furo Santins, head of the math department of the University of Arcturus, gazed long and steadily at his Sirian colleague.
'No, no, you're wrong! His equations were legitimate. I checked them rnyself.'
'Mathematically, yes,' retorted the round-faced Sirian. 'But psychologically they had no meaning.'
Santins slapped his high forehead. 'Meaning! Listen to the mathematician talk. Great space, man, what have mathematics to do with meaning? Mathematics is a tool and as long as it can be manipulated to give proper answers and to make correct predictions, actual meaning has no significance. I'll say this for Tan Porus - most psychologists don't know enough mathematics to handle a slide-rule efficiently, but he knows his stuff.'
The other nodded doubtfully, 'I guess so. I guess so. But using imaginary quantities in psychological equations stretches my faith in science just a little bit. Square root of minus one!'
He shudderedÖ
The seniors' lounge in Psychology Hall was crowded and a-buzz with activity. The rumor of Porus's solution to the now-classic problem of the squid had spread fast, and conversation touched on nothing else.
At the center of the thickest group was Lor Haridin. He was young, with but newly acquired Senior status. But as Porus's assistant he was, under present conditions, master of the situation.
'Look, fellows - just exactly what it's all about I don't know. That's the old man's secret. All I can tell you is that I've got the general idea as to how he solved it.'
The others squeezed closer. 'I hear he had to make up a new mathematical notation for the squid,' said one, 'like that time we had trouble with the humanoids of Sol.'
Lor Haridin shook his head. 'Worse! What made him think of it, I can't imagine. It was either a brainstorm or a nightmare, but anyway he introduced imaginary quantities - the square root of minus one.'
There was an awful silence and then someone said, 'I don't believe it!'
'Fact!' was the complacent reply.
'But it doesn't make sense. What can the square root of minus one represent, psychologically speaking? Why, that would mean' - he was doing rapid calculation in his head, as were most of the others - 'that the neural synapses were hooked up in neither more nor less than four dimensions!'
'Sure,' broke in another. 'I suppose that if you stimulate the squid today, it will react yesterday. That's what an imaginary would mean. Comet gas! That's what I say.'
'That's why you're not the man Tan Porus is,' said Haridin. 'Do you suppose he cares how many imaginaries there are in the intermediate steps if they all square out into minus one in the final solution. All he's interested in is that they give him the proper sign in the answer - an answer which will explain that sleep business. As for its physical significance, what matter? Mathematics is only a tool, anyway.'
The others considered silently and marveled.
Tan Porus sat in his stateroom aboard the newest and most luxurious interstellar liner and gazed at the young man before him happily. He was in amazing good humour and, for perhaps the first time in his life, did not mind being interviewed by the keen, efficient employees of the Ether Press.
The Ethereporter on his side wondered in silence at the affability of the scientist. From bitter experience, he had found out that scientists, as a whole, detested reporters - and that psychologists, in particular, thought it fun to practice a bit of applied psych on them and to induce killingly amusing - to others - reactions.
He remembered the time that the old fellow from Canopus had convinced him that arboreal life was the greatest good. It had taken twenty men to drag him down from the tree-tops and an expert psychologist to bring him back to normal.
But here was the greatest of them all, Tan Porus, actually answering questions like a normal human being.
'What I would like to know now, Professor,' said the reporter, 'is just what this imaginary quantity is all about. That is,' he interposed hastily, 'not the mathematics of it - we'll take your word on that - but just a general idea that the ordinary humanoid can picture. For instance, I've heard that the squid has a four-dimensional mind.'
Porus groaned, 'Oh, Rigel! Four-dimensional poppycock! To tell the honest truth, that imaginary I used - which seems to have caught the popular fancy - probably indicates nothing more than some abnormality in the squid's nervous system, but just what, I don't know. Certainly, to the gross methods of ecology and micro-physiology, nothing unusual has been found. No doubt, the answer would lie in the atomic physics of the creature's brain, but there I have no hope.' There was a trace of disdain in his voice. 'The atomic physicists are too far behind the psychologists to expect them to catch up at this late date.'
The reporter bore down furiously on his stylus. The next day's headline was clear in his mind: Noted Psychologist Blasts Atomic Physicists!
Also, the headline of the day after: Indignant Physicists Denounce Noted Psychologist!
Scientific feuds were great stuff for the Ether Press, particularly that between psychologists and physicists, who, it was well known, hated each other's guts.
The reporter glanced up brightly. 'Say, Professor, the human-oids of the galaxy are very interested, you know, in the private lives of you scientists. I hope you don't mind if I ask you a few questions about your trip home to Rigel IV.'
'Go ahead,' said Porus, genially. Tell them it's the first time I'm getting home in two years. I'm sort of looking forward to it. Arcturus is just a bit too yellow for my eyes and the furniture you have here is too big.'
'It's true, isn't it, that you have a wife at home?'
Porus coughed. 'Hmm, yes. Sweetest little woman in the galaxy. I'm looking forward to seeing her, too. Put that down.'
The reporter put it down. 'How is it you didn't bring her to Arcturus with you?'
Some of the geniality left the Rigellian's face. 'I like to be alone when I work. Women are all right - in their place. Besides, my idea of a vacation is one by myself. Don't put that down."
The reporter didn't put it down. He gazed at the other's little form with open admiration. 'Say, Prof, how did you ever get her to stay home, though? I wish you'd tell me the secret.' Then, with a wealth of feeling he added, 'I could use it!'
Porus laughed. 'I tell you, son. When you're an ace psychologist, you're master in your own home!'
He motioned the interview to an end and then suddenly grasped the other by the arm. His green eyes were piercingly sharp. 'And listen, son, that last remark doesn't go into the story, you know.'
The reporter paled and backed away. 'No, sir; no, sir! We've got a little saying in our profession that goes: "Never monkey around with a psychologist, or he'll make a monkey of you."'
'Good! I can do it literally, you know, if I have to.'
The young press employee ducked out hastily after that, wiped the cold perspiration from his brow and left with his story. For a moment, towards the last, he had felt himself hanging on the ragged edge. He made a mental note to refuse all future interviews with psychologists - unless they raised his pay.
Tens of billions of miles out, the pure white orb of Rigel had reached Porus's eyes, and something in his heart uplifted him.
Type B reaction - nostalgia; conditioned reflex through association of Rigel with happy scenes of youth -
Words, phrases, equations spun through his keen brain, but he was happy in spite of them. And in a little while, the human triumphed over the psychologist and Porus abandoned analysis for the superior joy of uncritical happiness.
He sat up past the middle of the sleep period two nights before the landing to catch first glimpse of Hanlon, fourth planet of Rigel, his home world. Some place on that world, on the shores of a quiet sea, was a little two-story house. A little house - not those giant structures fit only for Arcturians and other hulking humanoids.
It was the summer season now and the house would be bathed in the pearly light of Rigel, and after the harsh yellow-red of Arcturus, how restful that would be.
And - he almost shouted in his joy - the very first night he was going to insist on gorging himself with broiled tryp-tex. He hadn't tasted it for two years, and his wife was the best hand at tryptex in the system.
He winced a little at the thought of his wife. It had been a dirty trick, getting her to stay home the last two years, but it had had to be done. He glanced over the papers before him once more. There was just a little nervousness in his fingers as they shuffled the sheets. He had spent a full day in calculating her reactions at first seeing him after two years' absence and they were not pleasant.
Nina Porus was a woman of untamed emotions, and he would have to work quickly and efficiently.
He spotted her quickly in the crowd. He smiled. It was nice to see her, even if his equations did predict long and serious storms. He ran over his initial speech once more and made a last-minute change.
And then she saw him. She waved frantically and broke from the forefront of the crowd. She was on Tan Porus before he was aware of it and, in the grip of her affectionate embrace, he went limp with surprise.
That wasn't the reaction to be expected at all! Something was wrong!
She was leading him dexterously through the crowd of reporters to the waiting stratocar, talking rapidly along the way.
'Tan Porus, I thought I'd never live to see you again. It's so good to have you with me again; you have absolutely no idea. Everything here at home is just fine, of course, but it isn't quite the same without you.'
Porus's green eyes were glazed. This speech was entirely uncharacteristic of Nina. To the sensitive ears of a psychologist, it sounded little short of the ravings of a maniac. He had not even the presence of mind to grunt at proper intervals. Frozen mutely in his seat, he watched the ground rush downwards and heard the air shriek backwards as they headed for their little house by the sea.
Nina Porus prattled on gaily - the one normal aspect of her conversation being her ability to uphold both ends of a dialogue with smooth efficiency.
'And, of course, dear, I've fixed up an entire tryptex, broiled to a turn, garnished with sarnees. And, oh yes, about that affair last year with that new planet - Earth, do you call it? I was so proud of you when I heard about it. I said -'
And so on and on, until her voice degenerated into a meaningless conglomeration of sounds.
Where were her tears? Where were the reproaches, the threats, the impassioned self-pity?
Tan Porus roused himself to one great effort at dinner. He stared at the steaming dish of tryptex before him with an odd lack of appetite and said, This reminds me of the time at Arcturus when I dined with the President Delegate -'
He went into details, dilating on the gayety and abandon of the affair, waxing lyrical over his own enjoyment of it, stressing, almost unsubtly, the fact that he had not missed his wife, and finally, in one last wild burst of desperation, mentioning casually the presence of a surprising number of Rigellian females in the Arcturian system.
And through it all, his wife sat smiling. 'Wonderful, darling,' she'd say. 'I'm so glad you enjoyed yourself. Eat your tryptex.'
But Porus did not eat his tryptex. The mere thought of food nauseated him. With one lingering stare of dismay at his wife, he arose with what dignity he could muster and left for the privacy of his room.
He tore up the equations furiously and hurled himself into a chair. He seethed with anger, for evidently something had gone wrong with Nina. Terribly wrong! Even interest in another man - and for just a moment that had occurred to him as a possible explanation - would not cause such a revolution in character.
He tore at his hair. There was some hidden factor more startling than that - but what it was he had no idea. At that, moment Tan Porus would have given the sum total of his worldly possessions to have his wife enter and make one - just one - attempt to snatch his scalp off, as of old.
And below, in the dining room, Nina Porus allowed a crafty gleam to enter her eye.
Lor Haridin put down his pen and said, 'Come in!' The door opened, and his friend, Eblo Ranin, entered, brushed off a corner of the desk and sat down.
'Haridin, I've got an idea.' His voice was uncommonly like a guilty whisper.
Haridin gazed at him suspiciously.
'Like the time,' he said, 'you set up the booby trap for old man Obel?'
Ranin shuddered. He had spent two days hiding in the ventilator shaft after that brilliant piece of work. 'No, this is legitimate. Listen, Porus left you in charge of the squid, didn't he?'
'Oh, I see what you're getting at. It's no go. I can feed the squid, but that's all. If I as much as clapped my hands at it to induce a color-change tropism, the boss would throw a fit.'
To space with him! He's parsecs away, anyway.' Ranin drew forth a two-month-old copy of the J.G.P. and folded the cover back. 'Have you been following Livell's experiments at Procyon U.? You know - magnetic fields applied with and without ultra-violet radiation.'
'Out of my field,' grunted Haridin. 'I've heard of it, but that's all. What about it?'
'Well, it's a type E reaction which gives, believe it or not, a strong Fimbal Effect in practically every case, especially in the higher invertebrates.' 'Hmm!'
'Now, if we could try it on this squid, we could -' 'No, no, no, no!' Haridin shook his head violently. 'Porus would break me. Great stars and little meteors, how he would break me!'
'Listen, you nut - Porus can't tell you what to do with the squid. It's Frian Obel that has final say. He's head of the Psychological Board, not Porus. All you have to do is to apply for his permission and you'll get it. Just between us, since that Homo Sol affair last year, he can't stand the sight of Porus anyway.'
Haridin weakened. 'You ask him.'
Ratlin coughed. 'No. On the whole, perhaps I'd better not. He's sort of got a suspicion that I set that booby trap, and I'd rather keep out of his way.'
'Hmm. Well -all right!'
Lor Haridin looked as if he had not slept well for a week -which shows that sometimes appearances are not deceiving. Eblo Ranin regarded him with patient kindliness and sighed.
'Look! Will you please sit down? Santin said he would have the final results in today, didn't he?'
'I know, I know, but it's humiliating. I spent seven years on higher math. And now I make a stupid mistake and can't even find it!'
'Maybe it's not there to find.'
'Don't be silly. The answer is just impossible. It must be impossible. It must be.' His high forehead creased. 'Oh, I don't know what to think.'
He continued his concentrated attempt to wear out the nap of the rug beneath and mused bitterly. Suddenly he sat down.
'It's those time integrals. You can't work with them, I tell you. You look 'em up in a table, taking half an hour to find the proper entry, and they give you seventeen possible answers. You have to pick the one that makes sense, and - Arcturus help me! - either they all do, or none do! Run up against eight of them, as we do in this problem, and we've got enough permutations to last us the rest of our life. Wrong answer! It's a wonder I lived through it at all.'
The look he gave the fat volume of Helo's Tables of Time Integrals did not sear the binding, to Ranin's great surprise.
The signal light flashed, and Haridin leaped to the door.
He snatched the package from the messenger's hand and ripped open the wrappings frantically.
He turned to the last page and stared at Santin's final note:
'Your calculations are correct. Congratulations - and won't this knock Porus's head right off his shoulders! Better get in touch with him at once.'
Ranin read it over the other's shoulder, and for one long minute the two gazed at each other.
'I was right,' whispered Haridin, eyes bulging. 'We've found something in which the imaginary doesn't square out. We've got a predicted reaction which includes an imaginary quantity!'
The other swallowed and brushed aside his stupefaction with an effort. 'How do you interpret it?'
'Great space! How in the galaxy should I know? We've got to get Porus, that's all.'
Ranin snapped his fingers and grabbed the other by the shoulders. 'Oh, no, we won't. This is our big chance. If we can carry this through, we're made for life.' He stuttered in his excitement. 'Arcturus! Any psychologist would sell his life twice over to have our opportunity right now.'
The Draconian squid crawled placidly about, unawed by the huge solenoid that surrounded its tank. The mass of tangled wires, the current leads, the mercury-vapor lamp up above meant nothing to it. It nibbled contentedly at the fronds of the sea fern about it and was at peace with the world.
Not so the two young psychologists. Eblo Ranin scurried through the complicated set-up in a last-minute effort at checking everything. Lor Haridin helped him in intervals between nail-biting.
'Everything's set,' said Ranin, and swabbed wearily at his damp brow. 'Let her shoot!'
The mercury-vapor!amp went on and Haridin pulled the window curtains together. In the cold red-less light, two green tinted faces watched the squid closely. It stirred restlessly, its warm pink changing to a dull black in the mercury light.
'Turn on the juice,' said Haridin hoarsely.
There was a soft click, and that was all.
'No reaction?' questioned Ranin, half to himself. And then he held his breath as the other bent closer.
'Something's happening to the squid. It seems to glow a bit -or is it my eyes?'
The glow became perceptible and then seemed to detach itself from the body of the animal and take on a spherical shape of itself. Long minutes passed.
'It's emitting some sort of radiation, field, force - whatever you want to call it - and there seems to be expansion with time.'
There was no answer, and none was expected. Again they waited and watched.
And then Ranin emitted a muffled cry and grasped Hari-din's elbow tightly. 'Crackling comets, what's it doing?'
The globular glowing sphere of v/hatever it was had thrust out a pseudopod. A gleaming little projection touched the swaying branch of the sea-fern, and where it touched the leaves turned brown and withered!
'Shut off the current!'
The current clicked off; the mercury-vapor lamp went out; the shades were parted and the two stared at each other nervously.
'What was it?'
Haridin shook his head. 'I don't know. It was something definitely insane. I never saw anything like it.'
'You never saw an imaginary in a reaction equation before, either, did you? As a matter of fact, I don't think that expanding field was any known form of energy at -'
His breath came out in one long whistling exhalation and he retreated slowly from the tank containing the squid. The mollusc was motionless, but around it half the fern in the tank hung sere and withered.
Haridin gasped. He pulled the shades and in the gloom, the globe of glowing haze bulked through half the tank. Little curving tentacles of light reached toward the remaining fern and one pulsing thread extended through the glass and was creeping along the table.
That fright in Ranin's voice rendered it a cracked, scarcely-understood sound.
'It's a lag reaction. Didn't you test it by Wilbon's Theorem?'
'How could I?' The other's heart pumped madly and his dry lips fought to form words. 'Wilbon's Theorem didn't make sense with an imaginary in the equation. I let it go.'
Ranin sped into action with feverish energy. He left the room and was back in a moment with a tiny, squealing, squirrel-like animal from his own lab. He dropped it in the path of the thread of light stealing along the table, and held it there with a yard rule.
The glowing thread wavered, seemed to sense the presence of life in some horribly blind way, and lunged toward it. The little rodent squealed once, a high-pitched shriek of infinite torture, and went limp. In two seconds it was a shriveled, shrunken travesty of its former self.
Ranin swore and dropped the rule with a sudden yell, for the thread of light - a bit brighter, a bit thicker - began creeping up the wood toward him.
'Here,' said Haridin, 'let's end this!' He yanked a drawer open and withdrew the chromium-plated Tonite gun within. Its sharp thin beam of purple light lunged forward toward the squid and exploded in blazing, soundless fury against the edge of the sphere of force. The psychologist shot again and again, and then compressed the trigger to form one continuous purple stream of destruction that ceased only when power failed.
And the glowing sphere remained unharmed. It engulfed the entire tank. The ferns were brown masses of death.
'Get the Board,' yelled Ranin. 'It's beyond us entirely!'
There was no confusion - humanoids in the mass are simply not subject to panic, if you don't count the half-genius, half-humanoid inhabitants of the planets of Sol - and the evacuation of the University grounds was carried out smoothly.
'One fool,' said old Mir Deana, ace physicist of Arcturus U., 'can ask more questions than a thousand wise men can answer.' He fingered his scraggly beard and his button nose sniffed loudly in disdain.
'What do you mean by that?' questioned Frian Obel sharply. His green Vegan skin darkened angrily.
'Just that, by analogy, one cosmic fool of a psychologist can make a bigger mess than a thousand physicists can clear up.'
Obel drew in his breath dangerously. He had his own opinion of Haridin and Ranin, but no lame-brain psysicist could -
The plump figure of Qual Wynn, university president, came charging down upon them. He was out of breath and spoke between puffs.
'I've gotten in touch with the Galactic Congress and they're arranging for evacuation of all Eron, if necessary.' His voice became pleading. 'Isn't there anything that can be done?'
Mir Deana sighed, 'Nothing - yet! All we know is this: the squid is emitting some sort of pseudo-living radiatory field which is not electromagnetic in character. Its advance cannot be stopped by anything we have yet tried, material or vacuum. None of our weapons affect it, for within the field the ordinary attributes of space-time apparently don't hold.'
The president shook a worried head. 'Bad, bad! You've sent for Porus, though?' He sounded as though he were clutching at a last straw.
'Yes,' scowled Frian Obel. 'He's the only one that really knows that squid. If he can't help us, no one can.' He stared off toward the gleaming white of the university buildings, where the grass over half the campus was brown stubble and the trees blasted ruins.
'Do you think,' said the president, turning to Deana once more, 'that the field can span interplanetary space?'
'Sizzling novae, I don't know what to think!' Deana exploded, and he turned pettishly away.
There was a thick silence of utter gloom.
Tan Porus was sunk in deep apathy. He was unaware of the brilliant coruscations of color overhead. He didn't hear a sound of the melodious tones that filled the auditorium.
He knew only one thing - that he had been talked into attending a concert. Concerts above all were anathema to him, and in twenty years of married life he had steered clear of them with a skill and ease that only the greatest psychologist of them all could have shown. And now -
He was startled out of his stupor by the sudden discordant sounds that arose from the rear.
There was a rush of ushers to the exit where the disturbance originated, a waving of protesting uniformed arms and then a strident voice: 'I am here on urgent business direct from the Galactic Congress on Eron, Arcturus. Is Tan Porus in the audience?'
Tan Porus was out of his seat with a bound. Any excuse to leave the auditorium was nothing short of heaven-sent.
He ripped open the communication handed him by the messenger and devoured its contents. At the second sentence, his elation left him. When he was finished, he raised a face in which only his darting green eyes seemed alive.
'How soon can we leave?'
'The ship is waiting now.'
'Come, then.'
He took one step forward and stopped. There was a hand on his elbow.
'Where are you going?' asked Nina Porus. There was hidden steel in her voice.
Tan Porus felt stifled for a moment. He foresaw what would happen. 'Darling, I must go to Eron immediately. The fate of a world, of the whole galaxy perhaps, is at stake. You don't know how important it is. I tell you -'
'All right, go! And I'll go with you.'
The psychologist bowed his head.
'Yes, dear!' he said. He sighed.
The psychological board hemmed and hawed as one man and then stared dubiously at the large-scale graph before them.
'Frankly, gentlemen,' said Tan Porus, 'I don't feel too certain about it myself, but - well, you've all seen my results, and checked them too. And it is the only stimulus that will yield a canceling reaction.'
Frian Obel fingered his chin nervously. 'Yes, the mathematics is clear. Increase of hydrogen-ion activity past pH3 would set up a Demane's Integral and that- But listen, Porus, we're not dealing with space-time. The math might not hold - perhaps nothing will hold.'
'It's our only chance. If we were dealing with normal space-time, we could just dump in enough acid to kill the blasted squid or fry it with a Tonite. As it is, we have no choice but to take our chances with -'
Loud voices interrupted him. 'Let me through, I say! I don't care if there are ten conferences going on!'
The door swung open and Qual Wynn's portly figure made its entrance. He spied Porus and bore down upon him. 'Porus, I tell you I'm going crazy. Parliament is holding me, as university president, responsible for all this, and now Deana says that-' He sputtered into silence and Mir Deana, standing composedly behind him, took up the tale.
'The field now covers better than one thousand square miles and its rate of increase is growing steadily. There seems to be no doubt now that it can span interplanetary space if it wishes to do so - interstellar as well, if given the time.'
'You hear that? You hear that?' Wynn was fairly dancing in his anxiety. 'Can't you do something? The galaxy is doomed, I tell you, doomed!'
'Oh, keep your tunic on,' groaned Porus, 'and let us handle this.' He turned to Deana. 'Didn't your physicist stooges conduct some clumsy investigations as to the speed of penetration of the field through various substances?'
Deana nodded stiffly.
'Penetration varies, in general, inversely with density. Osmium, iridium and platinum are the best. Lead and gold are fair.'
'Good! That checks! What I'll need then is an osmium-plated suit with a lead-glass helmet. And make both plating and helmet good and thick.'
Qual Wynn stared horrified. 'Osmium plating! Osmium! By the great nebula, think of the expense.'
'I'm thinking,' said Porus frostily.
'But they'll charge it to the university; they'll -' He recovered with difficulty as the somber stares of the assembled psychologists fastened themselves upon him. 'When do you need it?' he muttered weakly.
'You're really going, yourself?'
'Why not?' asked Porus, clambering out of the suit.
Mir Deana said, 'The lead-glass headpiece will hold off the field not longer than an hour and you'll probably be getting partial penetration in much shorter time. I don't know if you can do it.'
'I'll worry about that.' He paused, and then continued uncertainly. 'I'll be ready in a few minutes. I'd like to speak to my wife first - alone.'
The interview was a short one. It was one of the very few occasions that Tan Porus forgot that he was a psychologist, and spoke as his heart moved him, without stopping to consider the natural reaction of the one spoken to.
One thing he did know - by instinct rather than thought -and that was that his wife would not break down or go sentimental on him; and there he was right. It was only in the last few seconds that her eyes fell and her voice quavered. She tugged a handkerchief from her wide sleeve and hurried from the room.
The psychologist stared after her and then stooped to pick up the thin book that had fallen as she had removed the handkerchief. Without looking at it, he placed it in the inner pocket of his tunic. He smiled crookedly. 'A talisman!' he said.
Tan Porus's gleaming one-man cruiser whistled into the 'death field.' The clammy sensation of desolation impressed itself upon him at once.
He shrugged. 'Imagination! Mustn't get nervy now.'
There was the vaguest glitter - a sparkle that was felt rather than seen - in the air about him. And then it invaded the ship itself, and, looking up, the Rigellian saw the five Eronian rice-birds he had brought with him lying dead on the floor of their cage, huddled masses of bedraggled feathers.
'The "death field" is in,' he whispered. It had penetrated the steel hull of the cruiser.
The cruiser bumped to a rather unskillful landing on the broad university athletic field, and Tan Porus, an incongruous figure in the bulky osmium suit, stepped out. He surveyed his depressing surroundings. From the brown stubble underfoot to the glimmering haze that hid the normal blue of the sky, all seemed - dead.
He entered Psychology Hall.
His lab was dark; the shades were still drawn. He parted them and studied the squid's tank. The water replenisher was still working, for the tank was full. However, that was the only normal thing about it. Only a few dark-brown, ragged strands of rot were left of what had once been sea-fern. The squid itself lay inertly upon the floor of the tank.
Tan Porus sighed. He felt tired and numbed. His mind was hazy and unclear. For long minutes he stared about him un-seeingly.
Then, with an effort, he raised the bottle he held and glanced at the label - 12 molar hydrochloric acid.
He mumbled vaguely to himself. 'Two hundred cc. Just dump the whole thing in. That'll force the pH down - if only hydrogen ion activity means something here.'
He was fumbling with the glass stopper, and - suddenly -laughing. He had felt exactly like this the one and only time he had ever been drunk.
He shook the gathering cobwebs from his brain. 'Only got a few minutes to do - to do what? I don't know - something anyway. Dump this thing in. Dump it in. Dump! Dump! Dumpety-dump!' He was mumbling a silly popular song to himself as the acid gurgled its way into the open tank.
Tan Porus felt pleased with himself and he laughed. He stirred the water with his mailed fist and laughed some more. He was still singing that song.
And then he became aware of a subtle change in environment. He fumbled for it and stopped singing. And then it hit him with the suddenness of a downpour of cold water. The glitter in the atmosphere had gone!
With a sudden motion, he unclasped the helmet and cast it off. He drew in long breaths of air, a bit musty, but unkilling.
He had acidified the water of the tank, and destroyed the field at its source. Chalk up another victory for the pure mathematics of psychology!
He stepped out of his osmium suit and stretched. The pressure on his chest reminded him of something. Withdrawing the booklet his wife had dropped, he said, 'The talisman came through!' and smiled indulgently at his own whimsy.
The smile froze as he saw for the first time the title upon the book.
The title was Intermediate Course in Applied Psychology -Volume 5.
It was as if something large and heavy had suddenly fallen onto Porus's head and driven understanding into it. Nina had been boning up on applied psych for two whole years.
This was the missing factor. He could allow for it. He would have to use triple time integrals, but -
He threw the communicator switch and waited for contact.
'Hello! This is Porus! Come on in, all of you! The death field is gone! I've beaten the squid.' He broke contact and added triumphantly, '- and my wife!'
Strangely enough - or, perhaps, not so strangely - it was the latter feat that pleased him more.



***



The chief interest to me in 'The Imaginary' is that it foreshadows 'psychohistory' that was to play such a big role in the 'Foundation' series. It was in this story and in its predecessor, 'Homo Sol,' that for the first time I treated psychology as a mathematically refined science.
It was about time that I made another stab at Unknown, and I did so with a story called The Oak,' which, as I recall, was something about an oak tree that served as an oracle and delivered ambiguous statements. I submitted it to Campbell on July 16, 1940, and it was promptly rejected.
One of the bad things about writing for Unknown was that the magazine was one of a kind. If Unknown rejected a story, there was no place else to submit it. It was possible to try Weird Tales, a magazine that was older than any science fiction magazine, but it dealt with old-fashioned, creaky horror tales and paid very little to boot. I wasn't really interested in trying to get into it. (And besides, they rejected both 'Life Before Birth' and 'The Oak' when I submitted them.)
Still, July 29, 1940, was a turning point in my career, although, of course, I had no way of telling it. I had up to that point written twenty-two stories in twenty-five months. Of these I had sold (or was to sell) thirteen, while nine never sold at all and no longer exist. The record wasn't abysmal but neither was it great - let's call it mediocre.
However, as it happened, except for two short-short stories that were special cases, I never again wrote a science fiction story I could never sell. I had found the range.
But not Campbell 's range particularly. In August I wrote 'Heredity,' which I submitted to Campbell on August 15, and which he rejected two weeks later. Fortunately, Pohl snapped it up at once.






Heredity [4]


Dr. Stefansson fondled the thick sheaf of typewritten papers that lay before him, 'It's all here, Harvey - twenty-five years of work.'
Mild-mannered Professor Harvey puffed idly at his pipe, 'Well, your part is over - and Markey's, too, on Ganymede. It's up to the twins, themselves, now.'
A short ruminative silence, and then Dr. Stefansson stirred uneasily, 'Are you going to break the news to Allen soon?'
The other nodded quietly, 'It will have to be done before we get to Mars, and the sooner the better.' He paused, then added in a tightened voice, 'I wonder how it feels to find out after twenty-five years that one has a twin brother whom one has never seen. It must be a damned shock.'
'How did George take it?'
'Didn't believe it at first, and I don't blame him. Markey had to work like a horse to convince him it wasn't a hoax. I suppose I'll have as hard a job with Allen.' He knocked the dottle from his pipe and shook his head.
'I have half a mind to go to Mars just to see those two get together,' remarked Dr. Stefansson wistfully.
'You'll do no such thing, Stef. This experiment's taken too long and means too much to have you ruin it by any such fool move.'
'I know, I know! Heredity versus environment! Perhaps at last the definite answer.' He spoke half to himself, as if repeating an old, familiar formula, 'Two identical twins, separated at birth; one brought up oh old, civilized Earth, the other on pioneer Ganymede. Then, on their twenty-fifth birthday brought together for the first time on Mars - God! I wish Carter had lived to see the end of it. They're his children.'
'Too bad! - But we're alive, and the twins. To carry the experiment to its end will be our tribute to him.'
There is no way of telling, at first seeing the Martian branch of Medicinal Products, Inc., that it is surrounded by anything but desert. You can't see the vast underground caverns where the native fungi of Mars are artificially nurtured into huge blooming fields. The intricate transportation system that connects all parts of the square miles of fields to the central building is invisible. The irrigation system; the air-purifiers; the drainage pipes, are all hidden.
And what one sees is the broad squat red-brick building and Martian desert, rusty and dry, all about.
That had been all George Carter had seen upon arriving via rocket-taxi, but him, at least, appearances had not deceived. It would have been strange had it done so, for his life on Ganymede had been oriented in its every phase towards eventual general managership of that very concern. He knew every square inch of the caverns below as well as if he had been born and raised in them himself.
And now he sat in Professor Lemuel Harvey's small office and allowed just the slightest trace of uneasiness to cross his impassive countenance. His ice-blue eyes sought those of Professor Harvey.
'This - this twin brother o' mine. He'll be here soon?'
Professor Harvey nodded, 'He's on his way over right now.'
George Carter uncrossed his knees. His expression was almost wistful, 'He looks a lot like me, d'ya rack on?'
'Quite a lot. You're identical twins, you know.'
'Hmm! Rackon so! Wish I'd known him all the time - on Ganny!' He frowned, 'He's lived on Airth all's life, huh?'
An expression of interest crossed Professor Harvey's face. He said briskly, 'You dislike Earthmen?'
'No, not exactly,' came the immediate answer. 'It's just the Airthmen are tenderfeet. All of 'm I know are.'
Harvey stifled a grin, and conversation languished.
The door-signal snapped Harvey out of his reverie and George Carter out of his chair at the same instant. The professor pressed the desk-button and the door opened.
The figure on the threshold crossed into the room and then stopped. The twin brothers faced each other.
It was a tense, breathless moment, and Professor Harvey sank into his soft chair, put his finger-tips together and watched keenly.
The two stood stiffly erect, ten feet apart, neither making a move to lessen the distance. They made a curious contrast - a contrast all the more marked because of the vast similarity between the two.
Eyes of frozen blue gazed deep into eyes of frozen blue. Each saw a long, straight nose over full, red lips pressed firmly together. The high cheekbones were as prominent in one as in the other, the jutting, angular chin as square. There was even the same, odd half-cock of one eyebrow in twin expressions of absorbed, part-quizzical interest.
But with the face, all resemblance ended. Allen Carter's clothes bore the New York stamp on every square inch. From his loose blouse, past his dark purple knee breeches, salmon-colored cellulite stockings, down to the glistening sandals on his feet, he stood a living embodiment of latest Terrestrial fashion.
For a fleeting moment, George Carter was conscious of a feeling of ungainliness as he stood there in his tight-sleeved, close-necked shirt of Ganymedan linen. His unbuttoned vest and his voluminous trousers with their ends tucked into high-laced, heavy-soled boots were clumsy and provincial. Even he felt it - for just a moment.
From his sleeve-pocket Allen removed a cigarette case - it was the first move either of the brothers had made - opened it, withdrew a slender cylinder of paper-covered tobacco that spontaneously glowed into life at the first puff.
George hesitated a fraction of a second and his subsequent action was almost one of defiance. His hand plunged into his inner vest pocket and drew therefrom the green, shriveled form of a cigar made of Ganymedan greenleaf. A match flared into flame upon his thumbnail and for a long moment, he matched, puff for puff, the cigarette of his brother.
And then Allen laughed - a queer, high-pitched laugh, 'Your eyes are a little closer together, I think.'
'Rackon 'tis, maybe. Y'r hair's fixed sort o' different.' There was faint disapproval in his voice. Allen's hand went selfconsciously to his long, light-brown hair, carefully curled at the ends, while his eyes flickered over the carelessly-bound queue into which the other's equally long hair was drawn.
'I suppose we'll have to get used to each other. - I'm willing to try.' The Earth twin was advancing now, hand outstretched.
George smiled, 'Y' bet. 'At goes here, too.'
The hands met and gripped.
'Y'r name's All'n, huh?' said George.
'And yours is George, isn't it?' answered Allen.
And then for a long while they said nothing more. They just looked - and smiled as they strove to bridge the twenty-five year gap that separated them.
George Carter's impersonal gaze swept over the carpet of low-growing purple blooms that stretched in plot-path bordered squares into the misty distance of the caverns. The newspapers and feature writers might rhapsodize over the 'Fungus Gold' of Mars - about the purified extracts, in yields of ounces to acres of blooms, that had become indispensable to the medical profession of the System. Opiates, purified vitamins, a new vegetable specific against pneumonia - the blooms were worth their weight in gold, almost.
But they were merely blooms to George Garter - blooms to be forced to full growth, harvested, baled and shipped to the Aresopolis labs hundreds of miles away.
He cut his little ground car to half-speed and leant furiously out the window, 'Hi y' mudcat there. Y' with the dairty face. Watch what y'r doing - keep the donined water in the channel.'
He drew back and the ground car leapt ahead once more. The Ganymedan muttered viciously to himself, 'These domned men about here are wairse than useless. So many machines t' do their wairk for 'm they give their brains a pairrnenent vacation. I rackon.'
The ground car came to a halt and he clambered out. Picking his way between the fungus plots, he approached the clustered group of men about the spider-armed machine in the plotway ahead.
"Well, here I am. What is 't, All'n?'
Allen's head bobbed up from behind the other side of the machine. He waved at the men about him, 'Stop it for a second!' and leaped toward his twin.
'George, it works. It's slow and clumsy, but it v/orks. We can improve it now that we've got the fundamentals down. And in no time at all, we'll be able to -'
'Now wait a while, All'n. On Ganny, we" go slow. Y' live long, that way. What y' got there?'
Allen paused and swabbed at his forehead. His face shone with grease, sweat and excitement. 'I've been working on this thing ever since I finished college. It's a modification of something we have on Earth - but it's no end improved. It's a mechanical bloom picker.'
He had fished a much-folded square of heavy paper from his pocket and talked steadily as he spread it on the plotway before them, 'Up to now, bloom-picking has been the bottleneck of production, to say nothing of the 15 to 20% loss due to picking under- and over-ripe blooms. After all, human eyes are only human eyes, and the blooms - Here, look!'
The paper was spread flat and Allen squatted before it. George leaned over his shoulder, with frowning watchfulness.
'You see. It's a combination of fluoroscope and photo-electric cell. The ripeness of the bloom can be told by the state of the spores within. This machine is adjusted so that the proper circuit is tripped upon the impingement of just that combination of light and dark formed by ripe spores within the bloom. On the other hand, this second circuit - but look, it's easier to show you.'
He was up again, brimming with enthusiasm. With a jump, he was in the low seat behind the picker and had pulled the lever.
Ponderously, the picker turned toward the blooms and its 'eye' travelled sideways six inches above the ground. As it passed each fungus bloom, a long spidery arm shot out, lopping it cleanly half an inch from the ground and depositing it neatly in the downward-sloping slide beneath. A pile of blooms formed behind the machine.
'We can hook on a binder, too, later on. Do you notice those blooms it doesn't touch? Those are unripe. Just wait till it comes to an over-ripe one and see what it does.'
He yelled in triumph a moment later when a bloom was torn out and dropped on the spot.
He stopped the machine. 'You see? In a month, perhaps, we can actually start putting it to work in the fields.'
George Carter gazed sourly upon his twin, 'Take more 'n a month, I rackon. It'll take foraver, more likely.'
'What do you mean, forever. It just has to be sped up -'
'I don't care if 't just has t' be painted pairple. 'Tisn't going t' appear on my fields.'
'Your fields?'
'Yup, mine,' was the cool response. 'I've got veto pow'r here same as you have. Y' can't do anything 'thout my say-so - and y' won't get it f'r this. In fact, I want y' t' clear that thing out o' here, altogether. Got no use f r 't.'
Allen dismounted and faced his brother, 'You agreed to let me have this plot to experiment on, veto-free, and I'm holding you to that agreement.'
'All right, then. But keep y'r domned machine out o' the rest o' the fields.'
The Earthman approached the other slowly. There was a dangerous look in his eyes. 'Look, George, I don't like your attitude - and I don't like the way you're using your veto power. I don't know what you're used to running on Ganymede, but you're in the big time now, and there are a lot of provincial notions you'll have to get out of your head.'
'Not unless I want to. And if y' want t' have 't out with me, we'd batter go t' y'r office. Spatting before the men 'd be bad for discipline.'
The trip back to Central was made in ominous silence. George whistled softly to himself while Allen folded his arms and stared with ostentatious indifference at the narrow, twisting plotway ahead. The silence persisted as they entered the Earthman's office. Allen gestured shortly toward a chair and the Ganymedan took it without a word. He brought out his ever-present green-leaf cigar and waited for the other to speak.
Allen hunched forward upon the edge of his seat and leaned both elbows on his desk. He began with a rush.
'There's lots to this situation, George, that's a mystery to me. I don't know why they brought up you on Ganymede and me on Earth, and I don't know why they never let us know of each other, or made us co-managers now with veto-power over one another - but I do know that the situation is rapidly growing intolerable.
'This corporation needs modernization, and you know that. Yet you've been wielding that veto-power over every trifling advance I've tried to initiate. I don't know just what your viewpoint is, but I've a suspicion that you think you're still living on Ganymede. If you're still in the sticks, - I'm warning you - get out of them fast. I'm from Earth, and this corporation is going to be run with Earth efficiency and Earth organization. Do you understand?'
George puffed odorous tobacco at the ceiling before answering, but when he did, his eyes came down sharply, and there was a cutting edge to his voice.
'Airth, is it? Airth efficiency, no less? Well, All'n, I like ye. I can't help it. Y'r so much like me, that disliking y' would be like disliking myself, I rackon. I hate t' say this, but y're upbringing's all wrong.'
His. voice became sternly accusatory, 'Y'r an Airthman. Well, look at y'. An Airthman's but half a man at best, and naturally y' lean on machines. But d' y' suppose / want the corporation to be run by machines - just machines'} What're the men t' do?'
'The men run the machines,' came the clipped, angry response.
The Ganymedan rose, and a fist slammed down on the desk, 'The machines run the men, and y' know it. Fairst, y' use them; then y' depend on them; and finally y'r slaves t' them. Over on y'r pracious Airth, it was machines, machines, machines - and as a result, what are y'? I'll tell y'. Half a man!'
He drew himself up, 'I still like y'. I like y' well enough t' wish y'd lived on Gannie with me. By Jupe 'n' domn, 'twould have made a man o' y'.'
'Finished?' said Allen.
'Rackon so!'
'Then I'll tell you something. There's nothing wrong with you that a life time on a decent planet wouldn't have fixed. As it is, however, you belong on Ganymede. I'd advise you to go back there.'
George spoke very softly, 'Y'r not thinking o' taking a punch at me, are y'?'
'No. I couldn't fight a mirror image of myself, but if your face were only a little different, I would enjoy splashing it about the premises a bit.'
'Think y' could do it - an Airthman like you? Here, sit down. We're both getting a bit too excited, I rackon. Nothing'll be settled this way.'
He sat down once more, puffed vainly at his dead cigar, and tossed it into the incinerator chute in disgust.
'Where's y'r water?' he grunted.
Allen grinned with sudden delight, 'Would you object to having a machine supply it?'
'Machine? What d' y' mean?' The Ganymedan gazed about him suspiciously.
'Watch! I had this installed a week ago.' He touched a button on his desk and a low click sounded below. There was the sound of pouring water for a second or so and then a circular metal disk beside the Earthman's right hand slid aside and a cup of water lifted up from below.
'Take it,' said Allen.
George lifted it gingerly and drank it down. He tossed the empty cup down the incinerator shaft, then stared long and thoughtfully at his brother, 'May I see this water feeder o' y'rs?'
'Surely. It's just under the desk. Here, I'll make room for you.'
The Ganymedan crawled underneath while Allen watched uncertainly. A brawny hand was thrust out suddenly and a muffled voice said, 'Hand me a screwdriver.'
'Here! What are you going to do?'
'Nothing. Nothing 't all. Just want t' investigate this contraption.'
The screw-driver was handed down and for a few minutes there was no other sound than an occasional soft scraping of metal on metal. Finally, George withdrew a flushed face and adjusted his wrinkled collar with satisfaction.
'Which button do I press for the water?'
Allen gestured and the button was pressed. The gurgling of water sounded. The Earthman stared in mystification from his desk to his brother and back again. And.then he became aware of a moistness about his feet.
He jumped, looked downwards and squawked in dismay, 'Why, damn you, what have you done?' A snaky stream of water wriggled blindly out from under the desk and the pouring sound of water still continued.
George made leisurely for the door, 'Just short-caircuited it. Here's y'r screw-driver; fix 't up again.' And just before he slammed the door, 'So much f'r y'r pracious machines. They go wrong at the wrong times.'
The sounder was buzzily insistent and Allen Carter opened one eye peevishly. It was still dark.
With a sigh, he lifted one arm to the head of his bed and put the Audiomitter into commission.
The treble voice of Amos Wells of the night shift squawked excitedly at him. Allen's eyes snapped open and he sat up.
'You're crazy!' But he was plunging into his breeches even as he spoke. In ten seconds, he was careening up the steps three at a time. He shot into the main office just behind the charging figure of his twin brother.
The place was crowded; - its occupants in a jitter.
Allen brushed his long hair out of his eyes, 'Turn on the turret searchlight!'
'It's on,' said someone helplessly.
The Earthman rushed to the window and looked out. The yellow beam reached dimly out a few feet and ended in a muddy murkiness. He pulled at the window and it lifted upwards grittily a few inches. There was a whistle of wind and a tornado of coughing from within the room. Allen slammed it down again and his hands went at once to his tear-filled eyes.
George spoke between sneezes, 'We're not located in the sandstorm zone. This can't be one.'
'It is,' asserted Wells in a squeak. 'It's the worst I've ever seen. Started full blast from scratch just like that. It caught me flat-footed. By the time I closed off all exits to above, it was too late.'
'Too late!' Allen withdrew his attention from his sand-filled eyes and snapped out the words, 'Too late for what?'
'Too late for our rolling stock. Our rockets got it worst of all. There isn't one that hasn't its propulsives clogged with sand. And that goes for our irrigation pumps and the ventilating system. The generators below are safe but everything else will have to be taken apart and put together again. We're stalled for a week at least. Maybe more.'
There was a short, pregnant silence, and then Allen said, 'Take charge, Wells. Put the men on double shift and tackle the irrigation pumps first. They've got to be in working order inside of twenty-four hours, or half the crop will dry up and die on us. Here - wait, I'll go with you.'
He turned to leave, but his first footstep froze in midair at the sight of Michael Anders, communications officer, rushing up the stairs. 'What's the matter?'
Anders spoke between gasps, 'The damned planet's gone crazy. There's been the biggest quake in history with its center not ten miles from Aresopolis.'
There was a chorus of 'What?' and a ragged follow-up of blistering imprecations. Men crowded in anxiously; - many had relatives and wives in the Martian metropolis.
Anders went on breathlessly, 'It came all of a sudden. Aresopolis is in ruins and fires have started. There aren't any details but the transmitter at our Aresopolis labs went dead five minutes ago.'
There was a babel of comment. The news spread out into the furthest recesses of Central, and excitement waxed to dangerously panicky proportions. Allen raised his voice to a shout.
'Quiet, everyone. There's nothing we can do about Aresopolis. We've got our own troubles. This freak storm is connected with the quake some way - and that's what we have to take care of. Everyone back to his work now - and work fast. They'll be needing us at Aresopolis damned soon.' He turned to Anders, 'You! Get back to that receiver and don't knock off until you've gotten in touch with Aresopolis again. Coming with me, George?'
'No, rackon not,' was the response. 'Y' tend t' y'r machines. I'll go down with Anders.'
Dawn was breaking, a dusky, lightless dawn, when Allen Carter returned to Central. He was weary - weary in mind and body - and looked it. He entered the radio room.
'Things are a mess. If -'
There was a 'Shhh' and George waved frantically. Allen fell silent. Anders bent over the receiver, turning tiny dials with nervous fingers.
Anders looked up. 'It's no use, Mr. Carter. Can't get them.'
'All right. Stay here and keep y'r ears open. Let me know if anything turns up.'
He walked out, hooking an arm underneath his brother's and dragging the latter out.
'When c'n we get out the next shipment, All'n?'
'Not for at least a week. We haven't a thing that'll either roll or fly for days, and it will be even longer before we can start harvesting again.'
'Have we any supplies on hand now?'
'A few tons of assorted blooms - mainly the red-purples. The Earth shipment last Tuesday took off almost everything.'
George fell into a reverie.
His brother waited a moment and did sharply, 'Well, what's on your mind? What's the news from Aresopolis?'
'Domned bad! The quake's leveled three-fourths o' Aresopolis and the rest's pretty much gutted with fire, I rackon. There 're fifty thousand that'll have t' camp out nights. -That's no fun in Martian autumn weather with the Airth gravity system broken down.'
Allen whistled, 'Pneumonia!'
'And common colds and influenza and any o' half doz'n diseases t' say nothing o' people bairnt. - Old Vincent is raising cain.'
'Wants blooms?'
'He's only got a two-day supply on hand. He's got t' have more.'
Both were speaking quietly, almost with indifference, with the vast understatement that is all that makes great crises bearable.
There was a pause and then George spoke again, 'What the best we c'n do?'
'Not under a week - not if we kill ourselves to do it. If they could send over a ship as soon as the storm dies down, we might be able to send what we have as a temporary supply until we can get over with the rest.'
'Silly even t' think o' that. The Aresopolis port is just ruins. They haven't a ship t' their names.'
Again silence. Then Allen spoke in a low, tense voice, 'What are you waiting for? What's that look on your face for?"
'I'm waiting f'r y* t' admit y'r domned machines have failed y' in the fairest emairgency we've had t' meet.'
'Admitted,' snarled the Earthman.
'Good! And now it's up t' me t' show y' what human ingenuity can do.' He handed a sheet of paper to his brother, 'There's a copy of the message I sent Vincent.'
Allen looked long at his brother and slowly read the pencilled scribbling.
'Will deliver all we have on hand in thirty-six hours. Hope it will keep you going the few days until we can get a real shipment out. Things are a little rough out here.'
'How are you going to do it?' demanded Allen, upon finishing.
'I'm trying to show y',' answered George, and Allen realized for the first time that they had left Central and were out in the caverns.
George led the way for five minutes and stopped before an object bulking blackly in the dimness. He turned on the section lights and said, 'Sand truck!'
The sand truck was not an imposing object. With the low driving car in front and the three squat, open-topped freight-cars behind it, presented a picture of obsolete decrepitude. Fifteen years ago, it had been relegated to the dust-heap by the sand-sleds and rocket-freights.
The Ganymedan was speaking, 'Checked it an hour ago, m'self, and 'tis still in wairking order. It has shielded bearings, air conditioning unit f'r the driving car and an intairnal combustion engine.'
The other looked up sharply. There was an expression of distaste on his face. 'You mean it burns chemical fuel.'
'Yup! Gas'line. That's why I like it. Reminds me o' Ganymede. On Gannie, I had a gas engine that -'
'But wait a while. We haven't any of that gasoline.'
'No, rackon not. But we got lots o' liquid hydrocarbons round the place. How about Solvent D? That's mostly octane. We've got tanks o' it.'
Allen said, 'That's so; - but the truck holds only two.'
'I know it. I'm one.'
'And I'm the other.'
George grunted, 'I rackond y'd say that - but this isn't going t' be a push-button machine job. Rackon y'r up t' it - Airth-man?'
'I reckon I am - Gannie.'
The sun had been up some two hours before the sand-truck's engine whirred into life, but outside, the murk had become, if anything, thicker.
The main driveway within the caverns was ahum with activity. Grotesque figures with eyes peering through the thick glass of improvised air-helmets stepped back as the truck's broad, sand-adapted wheels began their slow turn. The three cars behind had been piled high with purple blooms, canvas covers had been thrown over them and bound down tightly - and now the signal was given to open the doors.
The lever was jerked downwards and the double doors separated with sand-clogged protests. Through a gray whirl of inblown sand, the truck made its way outwards, and behind it sand-coated figures brushed at their air-helmets and closed the doors again.
George Carter, inured by long Ganymedan custom, met the sudden gravity change as they left the protective Gravitor fields of the caverns, with a single long-drawn breath. His hands held steady upon the wheels. His Terrestrial brother, however, was in far different condition. The hard nauseating knot into which his stomach tied itself loosened only very gradually, and it was a long time before his irregular stertorous breathing approached anything like normality again.
And throughout, the Earthman was conscious of the other's side-long glance and of just a trace of a smile about the other's lips.
It was enough to keep the slightest moan from issuing forth, though his abdominal muscles cramped and icy perspiration bathed his face.
The miles clicked off slowly, but the illusion of motionless-ness was almost as complete as that in space. The surroundings were gray - uniform, monotonous and unvarying. The noise of the engine was a harsh purr and the clicking of the air-purifier behind like a drowsy tick. Occasionally, there was an especially strong gust of wind, and a patter of sand dashed against the window with a million tiny, separate pings.
George kept his eye strictly upon the compass before him. The silence was almost oppressive.
And then the Ganymedan swivelled his head, and growled, 'What's wrong with the domned vent'lator?'
Allen squeezed upward, head against the low top, and then turned back, pale-faced, 'It's stopped.'
'It'll be hours 'fore the storm's over. We've got t' have air till then. Crawl in back there and start it again.' His voice was flat and final.
'Here,' he said, as the other crawled over his shoulder into the back of the car. 'Here's the tool-kit. Y've got 'bout twenty minutes 'fore the air gets too foul t' breathe. 'Tis pretty bad now.'
The clouds of sand hemmed in closer and the dim yellow light above George's head dispelled only partially the darkness within.
There was the sound of scrambling from behind him and then Allen's voice, 'Damn this rope. What's it doing here?' There was a hammering and then a disgusted curse.
This thing is choked with rust.'
'Anything else wrong?' called out the Ganymedan.
'Don't know. Wait till I clear it out.' More hammering and an almost continuous harsh, scraping sound followed.
Allen backed into his seat once more. His face dripped rusty perspiration and a swab with the back of an equally damp, rust-covered hand did it no good.
'The pump is leaking like a punctured kettle, now that the rust's been knocked loose. I've got it going at top speed, but the only thing between it and a total breakdown is a prayer.'
'Start praying,' said George, bruskly. 'Pray for a button to push.'
The Earthman frowned, and stared ahead in sullen silence.
At four in the afternoon, the Ganymedan drawed, 'Air's beginning t' thin out, looks like.'
Allen snapped to alertness. The air was foul and humid within. The ventilator behind swished sibilantly between each click and the clicks were spacing themselves further apart. It wouldn't hold out much longer now.
'How much ground have we covered?'
' 'Bout a thaird o' the distance,' was the reply. 'How 'r y' holding out?'
'Well enough,' Allen snapped back. He retired once more into his shell.
Night came and the first brilliant stars of a Martian night peeped out when with a last futile and long-sustained swi-i-is-s-sh, the ventilator died.
'Domn!' said George. 'I can't breathe this soup any longer, anyway. Open the windows.'
The keenly cold Martian wind swept in and with it the last traces of sand. George coughed as he pulled his woolen cap over his ears and turned on the heaters.
'Y' can still taste the grit.'
Allen looked wistfully up into the skies, 'There's Earth -with the moon hanging right onto her tail.'
'Airth?' repeated George with fine contempt. His finger pointed horizonwards, 'There's good old Jupe for y'.'
And throwing back his head, he sang in a full-throated baritone:
When the golden orb o' love Shines down from the skies above, Then my spirit longs to go To that happy land I know, Back f good, old Ganyme-e-e-e-e-ede.'
The last note quavered and broke, and quavered and broke again and still again in an ever increasing rapidity of tempo until its vibrating ululation pierced the air about ear-shatter-ingly.
Allen stared at his brother wide-eyed, 'How did you do that?'
George grinned, 'That's the Gannie quaver. Didn't y' ever hear it before?'
The Earthman shook his head, 'I've heard of it, but that's all.'
The other became a bit more cordial, 'Well, o' course y' can only do it in a thin atmosphere. Y' should hear me on Gannie. I c'd shake y' right off y'r chair when I'm going good. Here! Wait till I gulp down some coffee, and then I'll sing y' vairse twenty-four o' the "Ballad o' Ganymede."'
He took a deep breath:
'There's a fair-haired maid I love
Standing in the light o' Jove And she's waiting there for me-e-e-e-e.
Then-'
Allen grasped him by the arm and shook him. The Gany-medan choked into silence.
'What's the matter?' he asked sharply.
'There was a thumping sound on the roof just a second ago. There's something up there.'
George stared upwards, 'Grab the wheel. I'll go up.' Allen shook his head, 'I'm going myself. I wouldn't trust myself running this primitive contraption.'
He was out on the running board the next instant.
'Keep her going,' he shouted, and threw one foot.up onto the roof.
He froze in that position when he became aware of two yellow slits of eyes staring hard into his. It took not more than a second for him to realize that he was face to face with a keazel, a situation which for discomfort is about on a par with the discovery of a rattlesnake in one's bed back on Earth.
There was little time for mental comparisons of his position with Earth predicaments, however, for the keazel lunged forward, its poisonous fangs agleam in the starlight.
Allen ducked desperately and lost his grip. He hit the sand with a slow-motion thud and the cold, scaly body of the Martian reptile was upon him.
The Earthman's reaction was almost instinctive. His hand shot out and clamped down hard upon the creature's narrow muzzle.
In that position, beast and man stiffened into breathless statuary. The man was trembling and within him his heart pounded away with hard rapidity. He scarcely dared move. In the unaccustomed Martian gravity, he found he could not judge the movements of his limbs. Muscles knotted almost of their own accord and legs swung when they ought not to.
He tried to lie still - and think.
The keazel squirmed, and from its lips, clamped shut by earth muscles, issued a tremendous whine. Allen's hand grew slick with perspiration and he could feel the beast's muzzle turn a bit within his palm. He clamped harder, panic-stricken. Physically, the keazel was no match for an Earthman, even a tired, frightened, gravity-unaccustomed Earthman - but one bite, anywhere, was all that was needed.
The keazel jerked suddenly; its back humped and its legs threshed. Allen held on with both hands and could not let go. He had neither gun or knife. There was no rock on the level desert sands to crack its skull against. The sand-truck had long since disappeared into the Martian night, and he was alone -alone with a keazel.
In desperation, he twisted. The keazel's head bent. He could hear its breath whistling forth harshly - and again there was that low whine.
Allen writhed above it and clamped knees down upon its cold, scaly abdomen. He twisted the head, further and further. The keazel fought desperately, but Allen's Earthly biceps maintained their hold. He could almost sense the beast's agony in the last stages, when he called up all his strength, - and something snapped.
And the beast lay still.
He rose to his feet, half-sobbing. The Martin night wind knifed into him and the perspiration froze on his body. He was alone in the desert.
Reaction set in. There was an intense buzzing in his ears. He found it difficult to stand. The wind was biting - but somehow he didn't feel it any more.
The buzzing in his ears resolved itself into a voice - a voice calling weirdly through the Martian wind.
'All'n, where are y'? Domn y', y' tanderfoot, where are y'? All'n! All'n!'
New life swept into the Earthman. He tossed the keazel's carcass onto his shoulders and staggered on towards the voice.
'Here I am, G-Gannie. Right here.'
He stumbled blindly into his brother's arms.
George began harshly, 'Y' blasted Airthman, can't y' even keep y'r footing on a sandtruck moving at ten miles per? Y' might've -'
His voice died away in a semi-gurgle.
Allen said tiredly, 'There was a keazel on the roof. He knocked me off. Here, put it somewhere. There's a hundred dollar bonus for every keazel skin brought in to Aresopolis.'
He had no clear recollection of anything for the next half hour. When things straightened out, he was in the truck again with the taste of warm coffee in his mouth. The engine was rumbling once more and the pleasant warmth of the heaters surrounded him.
George sat next to him silently, eyes fixed on the desert ahead. But once in a while, he cleared his throat and shot a lightning glance at his brother. There was a queer look in his eyes.
Allen said, 'Listen, I've got to keep awake - and you look half dead yourself - so how about teaching me that "Gannie quaver" of yours. That's bound to wake the dead.'
The Ganymedan stared even harder and then said gruffly, 'Sure, watch m' Adam's apple while I do 't again.'
The sun was half-way to zenith when they reached the canal.
An hour before dawn there had come the crackling sound of hoarfrost beneath the heavy wheels and that signified the end of the desert area and the approach of the canal oasis. With the rising of the sun, the crackling disappeared and the softening mud underneath slowed the sand-adapted truck. The pathetic clumps of gray-green scrub that dotted the flat landscape were the first variant to eternal red sand since the two had started on their journey.
And then Allen had learned forward and grasped his brother by the arm, 'Look, there's the canal itself right ahead.'
The 'canal' - a small tributary of the mighty Jefferson Canal - contained a mere trickle of water at this season of the year. A dirty winding line of dampness, it was, and little more. Surrounding it on both sides were the boggy areas of black mud that were to fill up into a rushing ice-cold current an Earth-year hence.
The sand-truck nosed gingerly down the gentle slope, weaving a tortuous path among the sparsely-strewn boulders brought down by the spring's torrents and left there as the sinking waters receded.
It slopped through the mud and splashed clumsily through the puddles. It jounced noisily over rocks, muddied itself past the hubs as it made its way through the murky mid-stream channel and then settled itself for the upward pull out.
And then, with a suddenness that tossed the two drivers out of their seats, it sideslipped, made one futile effort to proceed onwards and thereafter refused to budge.
The brothers scrambled out and surveyed the situation. George swore lustily, voice more thickly accented than ever.
'B' Jupe 'n' domn, we're in a pickled situation f'r fair. 'Tis wallowing in the mud there like a blasted pig.'
Allen shoved his hair back wearily, 'Well, don't stand there looking at it. We're still a hundred miles or better from Areso-polis. We've got to get it out of there.'
'Sure, but how?' His imprecations dropped to sibilant breathings as he reached into the truck for the coil of rope in the back. He looked at it doubtfully.
'Y' get in here, All'n, and when I pull, press down with y'r foot on that pedal.'
He was tying the rope to the front axle even as he spoke. He played it out behind him as he slogged out through ankledeep mud, and stretched it taut.
'All right, now, give I' he yelled. His face turned purple with effort as his back muscles ridged. Allen, within the car, pressed the indicated pedal to the floor, heard a loud roar from the engine and a spinning whir from the back wheels. The truck heaved once, and then sank back.
''Tis no use,' George called. 'I can't get a footing. If the ground were dry, I c'd do it.'
'If the ground were dry, we wouldn't be stuck,' retorted Allen. 'Here, give me that rope.'
'D y' think y' can do it, if / can't?' came the enraged cry, but the other had already left the car.
Allen had spied the large, deep-bedded boulder from the truck, and it was with relief that he found it to be within reaching distance of the rope. He pulled it taut and tossed its free end about the boulder. Knotting it clumsily, he pulled, and it held.
His brother leaned out of the car window, as he made his way, back, with one lumped Ganymedan fist agitating the air.
'Hi, y' nitwit. What're y' doing? D' y' expect that overgrown rock t' pull us out?'
'Shut up,' yelled back Allen, 'and feed her the gas when I pull.'
He paused midway between boulder and truck and seized the rope.
'Give!' he shouted in his turn, and with a sudden jerk pulled the rope toward him with both hands.
The truck moved; its wheels caught hold. For a moment it hesitated with the engine blasting ahead full speed, and George's hands trembling upon the wheel. And then it went over. And almost simultaneously, the boulder at the other end of the taut rope lifted out of the mud with a liquid smacking sound and went over on its side.
Allen slipped the noose off it and ran for the truck.
'Keep her going,' he shouted, and hopped onto the running board, rope trailing.
'How did y' do that?' asked George, eyes round with awe.
'I haven't got the energy to explain it now. When we get to Aresopolis and after we've had a good sleep, I'll draw the triangle of forces for you, and show you what happened. No muscles were involved. Don't look at me as if I were Hercules.'
George withdrew his gaze with an effort, 'Triangle o' forces, is it? I never heard o' it, but if that's what it c'n do, education's a great thing.'
'Comet-gas! Is any coffee left?' He stared at the last thermos-bottle, shook it near his ear dolefully, and said, 'Oh, well, let's practice the quaver. It's almost as good and I've practically got it perfected.'
He yawned prodigiously, 'Will we make it by nightfall?'
'Maybe!'
The canal was behind them now.
The reddening sun was lowering itself slowly behind the Southern Range. The, Southern Range is one of the two 'mountain chains' left on Mars. It is a region of hills; ancient, time-worn, eroded hills behind which lies Aresopolis.
It possesses the only scenery worth mentioning on all Mars and also the golden attribute of being able, through the up-drafts along its sides to suck an occasional rain out of the desiccated Martian atmosphere.
Ordinarily, perhaps, a pair from Earth and Ganymede might have idled through this picturesque area, but this was definitely not the case with the Carter twins.
Eyes, puffed for lack of sleep, glistened once more at the sight of hills on the horizon. Bodies, almost broken for sheer weariness, tensed once more when they rose against the sky.
And the truck leaped ahead, - for just behind the hills lay Aresopolis. The road they traveled was no longer a rule-edge straight one, guided by the compass, over table-top-flat land. It followed narrow, twisting trails over rocky ground.
They had reached Twin Peaks, then, when there was a sudden sputter from the motor, a few halting coughs and then silence.
Allen sat up and there was weariness and utter disgust in his voice, 'What's wrong with this everlastingly-to-be-damned machine now?'
His brother shrugged, 'Nothing that I haven't been expecting for the last hour. We're out o' gas. Doesn't matter at all. We're at Twin Peaks - only ten miles fr'm the city. We c'n get there in an hour, and then they c'n send men out here for the blooms.'
'Ten miles in an hour!' protested Allen. 'You're crazy.' His face suddenly twisted at an agonizing thought, 'My God! We can't do it under three hours and it's almost night. No one can last that long in a Martian night. George, we're -'
George was pulling him out of the car by main force, 'By Jupe 'n' domn, All'n, don't let the tenderfoot show through now. We c'n do it in an hour, I tell y'. Didn't y' ever try running under sub-normal gravity? It's like flying. Look at me.'
He was off, skimming the ground closely, and proceeding in ground-covering leaps that shrank him to a speck up the mountain side in a moment.
He waved, and his voice came thinly, 'Come on!'
Allen started, - and sprawled at the third wild stride, arms flailing and legs straddled wide. The Ganymedan's laughter drifted down in heartless gusts.
Allen rose angrily and dusted himself. At an ordinary walk, he made his way upwards.
'Don't get sore, All'n,' said George. 'It's a knack, and I've had practice on Gannie. Just pretend y'r running along a feather bed. Run rhythmically - a sort o' very slow rhythm -and run close t' the ground; don't leap high. Like this. Watch me!'
The Earthman tried it, eyes on his brother. His first few uncertain strides became surer and longer. His legs stretched and his arms swung as he matched his brother, step for step.
George shouted encouragement and speeded his pace, 'Keep lower t' the ground, All'n. Don't leap 'fore y'r toes hit the ground.'
Allen's eyes shone and, for the moment, weariness was forgotten, 'This is great! It is like flying - or like springs on your shoes.'
'Y' ought t' have lived on Gannie with me. We've got special fields f'r subgravity races. An expairt racer c'n do forty miles an hour at times - and I c'n do thirty-five myself. - O' course, the gravity there's a bit lower than here on Mars.'
Long hair streamed backwards in the wind and skin reddened at the bittercold air that blew past. The ruddy patches of sunlight traveled higher and higher up the slopes, lingered briefly upon the very summits and went out altogether. The short Martian twilight started upon its rapidly darkening career. The Evening Star - Earth - was already glimmering brightly, its attendant moon somewhat closer than the night previous.
The passing minutes went unheeded by Allen. He was too absorbed by the wonderful new sensation of sub-gravity running, to do anything more than follow his brother. Even the increasing chilliness scarcely registered upon his consciousness.
It was George, then, upon whose countenance a tiny, puckered uneasiness grew into a vast, panicky frown.
'Hi, All'n, hold up!' he called. Leaning backward, he brought himself to a short, hopping halt full of grace and ease. Allen tried to do likewise, broke his rhythm and went forward upon his face. He rose with loud reproaches.
The Ganymedan turned a deaf ear to them. His gaze was sombre in the dusk, 'D' y' know where we are, All'n?'
Allen felt a cold constriction about his windpipe as he stared about him quickly. Things looked different in semi-darkness, but they looked more different than they ought. It was impossible for things to be so different.
'We should've sighted Old Baldy by now, shouldn't we have?' he quavered.
'We sh'd've sighed him long ago,' came the hard answer. ' 'Tis that domned quake. Landslides must've changed the trails. The peaks themselves must've been screwed up -' His voice was thin-edged, 'Allen, 'tisn't any use making believe. We're dead lost.'
For a moment, they stood silently - uncertainly. The sky was purple and the hills retreated into the night. Allen licked bluechilled lips with a dry tongue.
'We can't be but a few miles away. We're bound to stumble on the city if we look.'
'Consider the situation, Airthman,' came the savage, shouted answer, ' 'Tis night, Martian night. The temperature's down past zero and plummeting every minute. We haven't any time t' look; - we've got t' go straight there. If we're not there in half an hour, we're not going t' get there at all.'
Allen knew that well, and mention of the cold increased his consciousness of it. He spoke through chattering teeth as he drew his heavy, fur-lined coat closer about him.
'We might build a fire!' The suggestion was a half-hearted one, muttered indistinctly, and fallen upon immediately by the other.
'With what?' George was beside himself with sheer disappointment and frustration. 'We've pulled through this far, and now we'll prob'ly freeze t' death within a mile o' the city. C'mon, keep running. It's a hundred-t'-one chance."
But Allen pulled him back. There was a feverish glint in the Earthman's eye, 'Bonfires!' he said irrelevantly. 'It's a possibility. Want to take a chance that might do the trick?'
'Nothin' else t' do,' growled the other. 'But hurry. Every minute I -'
'Then run with the wind - and keep going.'
'Why?'
'Never mind why. Do what I say - run with the wind!'
There was no false optimism in Allen as he bounded through the dark, stumbling over loose stones, sliding down declivities, - always with the wind at his back. George ran at his side, a vague, formless blotch in the night.
The cold was growing more bitter, but it was not quite as bitter as the freezing pang of apprehension gnawing at the Earthman's vitals.
Death is unpleasant!
And then they topped the rise, and from George's throat came a loud 'B' Jupe 'n' domn!' of triumph.
The ground before them, as far as the eye could see, was dotted by bonfires. Shattered Aresopolis lay ahead, its homeless inhabitants making the night bearable by the simple agency of burning wood.
And on the hilly slortes, two weary figures slapped each other on the backs, laughed wildly and pressed half-frozen, stubbly cheeks together for sheer, unadulterated joy.
They were there at last!
The Aresopolis lab, on the very outskirts of the city, was one of the few structures still standing. Within, by makeshift light, haggard chemists were distilling the last drops of extract.
Without, the city's police-force remnants were clearing desperate way for the precious flasks and vials as they were distributed to the various emergency medical centres set up in various regions of the bonfire-pocked ruins that were once the Martian metropolis.
Old Hal Vincent supervised the process and his faded eyes ever and again peered anxiously into the hills beyind, watching hopefully but doubtfully for the promised cargo of blooms.
And then two figures reeled out of the darkness and collapsed to a halt before him.
Chill anxiety clamped down upon him, 'The blooms! Where are they? Have you got them?'
'At Twin Peaks,' gasped Allen. 'A ton of them and better in a sand-truck. Send for them.'
' A group of police grind-cars set off before he had finished, and Vincent exclaimed bewilderedly, 'A sand-truck? Why didn't you send it in a ship? What's wrong with you out there, anyway? Earthquake-'
He received no direct answer. George had stumbled toward the nearest bonfire with a beatific expression on his worn face.
'Ahhh, 'tis warm!' Slowly, he folded and dropped, asleep before he hit the ground.
Allen coughed gaspingly, 'Huh! The Gannie tenderfoot! Couldn't - ulp - take it!'
And the ground came up and hit him in the face.
Allen woke with the evening sun in his eyes and the odor of frying bacon in his nostrils. George shoved the frying pan toward him and said between gigantic, wolfing mouthfuls, 'Help yourself.',
He pointed to the empty sand-truck outside the labs, 'They got the stuff all right.'
Allen fell to, quietly. George wiped his lips with the back of his hand and said, 'Say, All'n, how 'd y' find the city? I've been sitting here trying t' figure it all out.'
'It was the bonfires,' came the muffled answer. 'It was the only way they could get heat, and fires over square miles of land create a whole section of heated air, which rises, causing the cold surrounding air of the hills to sweep in.' He suited his words with appropriate gestures. 'The wind in the hills was heading for the city to replace warm air and we followed the wind. - Sort of a natural compass, pointing to where we wanted to go.'
George was silent, kicking with embarrassed vigor at the ashes of the bonfire of the night before.
'Lis'n, All'n, I've had y" a'wrong. Y' were an Airthman tanderfoot t' me till-' He paused, drew a deep breath and exploded with, 'Well, by Jupe 'n' domn, y'r my twin brother and I'm.proud o' it. All Airth c'dn't drown out the Carter blood in y'.'
The Earthman opened his mouth to reply but his brother clamped one palm over it. 'Y' keep quiet, till I'm finished. After we get back, y' can fix up that mechanical picker or anything else y' want. I drop my veto. If Airth and machines c'n tairn out y'r kind o' man, they're all right. But just the same,' there was a trace of wistfulness in his voice, 'y' got t' admit that everytime the machines broke down - from irrigation-trucks and rocket-ships to ventilators and sand-trucks -'twas men who had t' pull through in spite o' all that Mars could do.'
Allen wrenched his face from out behind the restraining palm.
The machines do their best,' he said, but not too vehemently.
'Sure, but that's all they can do. When the emairgency comes, a man's got t' do a damn lot better than his best or he's a goner.'
The other paused, nodded and gripped the other's hand with sudden fierceness, 'Oh, we're not so different. Earth and Ganymede are plastered thinly over the outside of us, but inside -'
He caught himself.
'Come on, let's give out with that old Gannie quaver.'
And from the two fraternal throats tore forth a shrieking eldritch yell such as the thin, cold Martian air had seldom before carried.



***



I got the cover again with 'Heredity.'
In connection with that story, I remember best a comment I received from a young fellow named Scott Feldman (who was then still in his teens but who was later, as Scott Meredith, to become one of the most important literary agents in the business). He disapproved of the story because I introduced two characters at the start who disappeared from the story and were never heard of again.
Once that was pointed out to me, it seemed to me that this was indeed a major flaw, and I wondered why neither Campbell nor Pohl had specifically pointed it out. I never quite had the courage to ask, however.
But it did cause me to look at my stories more closely thereafter, and to realize again that writing isn't all inspiration and free flow. You do have to ask yourself pretty mechanical questions, such as, 'What do I do with this character now that I've taken the trouble to make use of him?'
By the time Campbell was rejecting, and Pohl accepting 'Heredity,' I was writing 'History.' The same thing happened. I submitted it to Campbell on September 13. It was rejected, and, eventually, Pohl took it.







History [5]


Ullen's lank arm pushed the stylus carefully and painstakingly across the paper; his near-sighfed eyes blinked through thick lenses. The signal light flashed twice before he answered.
He turned a page, and called out, 'Is dat you, Johnnie? Come in, please.'
He smiled gently, his thin, Martian face alight with pleasure.
'Sit down, Johnnie - but first lower de window-shade. De glare of your great Eard sun is annoying. Ah, dat's good, and now sid down and be very, very quiet for just a little while, because I am busy.'
John Brewster shifted a pile of ill-stacked papers and seated himself. He blew the dust from the edges of an open book in the next chair and looked reproachfully on the Martian historian.
'Are you still poking around these musty old things? Don't you get tired?'
'Please, Johnnie,' Ullen did not look up, 'you will lose de page. Dat book dere is William Stewart's "Hitlerian Era" and it is very hard to read. So many words hß uses which he doesn't explain.'
His expression as it focussed upon Johnnie was one of frowning petulance, 'Never do dey explain deir terms. It is so unscientific. On Mars, before we even start, we say, "Dis is a list of all definitions of terms to be used." How oderwise can people talk sensibly? Hmp! You crazy Eardmen.'
'Oh, nuts, Ullen - forget it. Why don't you look at me. Don't you even notice anything?'
The Martian sighed, removed his glasses, cleaned them thoughtfully and carefully replaced them. He stared impersonally at Johnnie, 'Well, I dink it is new clothes you are wearing. It is not so?'
'New clothes! Is that all you can say, Ullen? This is a uniform. I'm a member of the Home Defense.' He rose to his feet, a picture of boyish exuberance.
'What is dis "Home Defense"?' asked Ullen languidly.
Johnnie gulped and sat down helplessly, 'You know, I really think you haven't heard that Earth and Venus have been at war for the last week. I'll bet money you haven't.'
'I've been busy.' He frowned and pursed his thin, bloodless lips, 'On Mars, dere is no war - at least, dere isn't any more. Once, we used to fight, but dat was long ago. Once we were scientists, too, and dat was long ago. Now, dere are only a few of us - and we do not fight. Dere is no happiness dat way.' He seemed to shake himself, and spoke more briskly, 'Tell me, Johnnie, do you know where it is I can find what it means, dis "national honor?" It holds me back. I can't go furder unless I can understand it.'
Johnnie rose to his full height and glittered in the spotless green of the Terrestrial Service. He laughed with fond indulgence. 'You're hopeless, Ullen, - you old coot. Aren't you going to wish me luck? I'm hitting space tomorrow.'
'Oh, is dere danger?'
There was a squawk of laughter, 'Danger? What do you think?'
'Well, den, to seek danger - it is foolish. Why do you do it?'
'You wouldn't understand, Ullen. Just wish me luck and say you hope I come through whole.'
'Cer-tain-ly! I don't want anyone to die.' He slipped his hand into the strong fist held out to him. 'Take care of yourself, Johnnie - and wait, before you go, bring me Stewart's book. Everything is so heavy here on Eard. Heavy, heavy, -and de words have no definitions.'
He sighed, and was back at his books as Johnnie slipped quietly out of the room.
'Dese barbarous people,' he muttered sleepily to himself. 'War! Dey dink dat by killing-' His voice died away and merged into a slurred mumble as his eyes followed creeping finger across the page.
' "From the very moment of the union of the Anglo-Saxon world into a single governmental entity and even as far back as the spring of 1941, it was evident that the doom of-"'
'Dese crazy Eardmen!'
Ullen leaned heavily upon his crutches on the steps of the University library and one thin hand shielded his watering eyes from the terrible Earthly sun.
The sky was blue, cloudless, - undisturbed. Yet somewhere up above, beyond the planet's airy blanket, steel-sided ships were veering and sparking in vicious combat. And down upon the city were falling the tiny 'Drops of Death,' the highly-publicized radioactive bombs that noiselessly and inexorably ate out a fifteen foot crater wherever they fell.
The city's population was herding into the shelters and burying themselves inside the deep-set leaden cells. Upstaring, silent, anxious, they streamed past Ullen. Uniformed guards invested some sort of order into the gigantic flight, steering the stragglers and speeding the laggards.
The air was filled with barked orders.
'Hit the shelter, Pop. Better get going. You can't stand there, you know.'
Ullen turned to the guard who addressed him and slowly brought his wandering thoughts to bear upon the situation.
'I am sorry, Eardman - but I cannot move very fast on your huge world.' He tapped one crutch upon the marble flags beneath. 'Dings are so heavy. If I were to crowd in wid de rest, I would be crushed.'
He smiled gently down from his lank height, and the guard rubbed a stubby chin, 'All right, pop, I can fix that. It is tough on you Marsies at that. - Here, hold those crutches up out of the way.'
With a heave, he cradled the Martian, 'Hold your legs close to my body, because we're going to travel fast.'
His bulky figure pressed through the line of Earthmen. Ullen shut his eyes as the rapid motion under supernormal gravity stirred his stomach into rebellion. He opened them once again in the dim recesses of the low-ceilinged shelter.
The guard set him down carefully and adjusted the crutches beneath Ullen's armpits, 'O.K. Pop. Take care of yourself.'
Ullen took in his surroundings and hobbled to one of the low benches at the near end of the shelter. From behind him came the sombre clang of the thick, leaden door.
The Martian historian fished a worn tablet from his pocket and scribbled slow notes. He disregarded the excited babble that arose about him and the scraps of heated talk that filled the air thickly.
And then he scratched at his furrowed forehead with the stub end of his pencil, meeting the staring eyes of the man sitting next to him. He smiled abstractedly and returned to his notes.
'You're a Martian, aren't you?' His neighbor spoke in quick, squeaky tones. 'I don't like foreigners much, but I've got nothing special against Marsies. These Veenies, now, they -'
Ullen's soft tones interrupted him. 'Hate is all wrong, I dink. Dis war is a great annoyance - a great one. It interferes wid my work and you Eardmen ought to stop it. Is it not so?'
'You can bet your hide we're going to stop it,' came the emphatic reply. 'We're going to bash their planet inside out -and the dirty Veenies with it.'
'You mean attack deir cities like dis?' The Martian blinked owlishly in thought, 'You dink dat would be best?'
'Damn it, yes. It -'
'But look.' Ullen placed a skeleton finger in one palm and continued in gentle argument. 'Would it not be easier to get de ships demselves by de fall-apart weapon? - Don't you dink so? Or is it dat de Venus people, dey have de screens?'
'What weapon, did you say?'
Ullen ruminated carefully, 'I suppose dat isn't de name you call it by - but I don't know about weapons, anyway. We call it on Mars de "skellingbeg" and dat means in English "fall-apart weapon." Now you know?'
There was no direct answer unless a vague under-breath mutter could be called one. The Earthman pushed away from his companion and stared at the opposite wall in a fidget.
Ullen sensed the rebuff and shrugged one shoulder wearily, 'It is not dat I care much about de whole ding. It is only dat de war is a big bodder. It should be ended.' He sighed, 'But I don't care!'
His fingers had just begun manipulating the pencil once more in its travels across the open tablet on his lap, when he looked up again.
'Tell me, please, what is de name of dat country where Hitler died. Your Hard names, dey are so complicated sometimes. I dink it begins wid an M.'
His neighbor ripped him open with a stare and walked away, Ullen's eyes followed him with a puzzled frown. And then the all-clear signal sounded. 'Oh, yes,' said Ullen. ' Madagascar! Such a silly name!'
Johnnie Brewster's uniform was war-worn now; a bit more wrinkled about the neck and shoulders, a trance more worn at knees and elbows.
Ullen ran his finger along the angry scar that ran the length of Johnnie's right fore-arm, 'It hurts no more, Johnnie?'
'Nuts! A scratch! I got the Veenie that did that. He's chasing dreams in the moon now.'
'You were in de hospital long, Johnnie?'
'A week!' He lit a cigarette, pushed some of the mess off the Martian's desk and seated himself. 'I've spent the rest of the time with my family, though I did get around to visiting you, you see.'
He leaned over and poked an affectionate hand at the Martian's leathery cheek, 'Aren't you going to say you're glad to see me?'
Ullen removed his glasses and peered at the Earthman, 'Why, Johnnie, are you so uncertain dat I am glad to see you, dat you require I should say it in words?' He paused, 'I'll make a note of dat. You silly Eardmen must always be telling each oder dese simple dings - and den you don't believe it anyway. On Mars -'
He was rubbing his glasses methodically, as he spoke, and now he replaced them, 'Johnnie, don't you Eardmen have de "fall-apart" weapon? I met a person once in de raid shelter and he didn't know what I was talking about.'
Johnnie frowned, 'I don't either, for that matter. Why do you ask?'
'Because it seems strange dat you should have to fight so hard dese Venus men, when dey don't seem to have de screens to stop it wid. Johnnie, I want de war should be over. It makes me all de time stop my work to go to a shelter.'
'Hold on, now, Ullen. Don't sputter. What is this "fall-apart" weapon? A disintegrator? What do you know about it?'
'I? I know nodding about it at all. I dought you knew - dat's why I asked. Back on Mars, in our histories, dey talk about using dat kind of weapon in our old wars. But we don't know nodding about weapons any more. Anyway, dey're so silly, because de oder side always dinks of someding which protects against it, and den everyding is de same as always. - Johnnie, do you suppose you could go down to de desk and ask for a copy of Higginboddam's "Beginnings of Space Travel?"'
The Earthman clenched his fists and shook them impotently, 'Ullen, you damned Martian pedant - don't you understand that this is important? Earth is at war? War! War! War!'
'Well, den, stop de war.' There was irritation in Ullen's voice. 'Dere is no peace and quiet anywheres on Eard. I wish I had dis library - Johnnie, be careful. Please, what are you doing? You're hurting me.'
'I'm sorry, Ullen, but you've got to come with me. We're going to see about this.' Johnnie had the feebly protesting Martian wedged into the wheel-chair and was off with a rush, before he had finished the sentence.
A rocket-taxi was at the bottom of the Library steps, and together chauffeur and Spaceman lifted the chair inside. With a comet-tail of smoke, they were off.
Ullen moaned softly at the acceleration, but Johnnie ignored him. ' Washington in twenty minutes, fellow,' he said to the driver, 'and ignore the signal beams.'
The starched secretary spoke in a frozen monotone, 'Admiral Korsakoff will see you now.'
Johnnie wheeled and stamped out the last cigarette butt. He shot a hasty glance at his watch and grunted.
At the motion of the wheel-chair, Ullen roused himself out of a troubled sleep. He adjusted his glasses, 'Did dey let us in finally, Johnnie?'
'Sh!'
Ullen's impersonal stare swept over the rich furnishings of the room, the huge maps of Earth and Venus on the wall, the imposing desk in the center. It lingered upon the pudgy, bearded figure behind this desk and then came to rest upon the lanky, sandy-haired man at his side.
The Martian attempted to rise from the chair in sudden eagerness, 'Aren't you Dr. Doming? I saw you last year at Princeton. You remember me, don't you? Dey gave me at dat time, my honorary degree.'
Dr. Thorning had advanced and shook hands vigorously, 'Certainly. You spoke then on Martian historical methods, didn't you?'
'Oh, you remember. I'm glad! But dis is a great opportunity for me, meeting you. Tell me, as a scientist, what would be your opinion of my deory dat de social insecurity of de Hit-lerian Era was de direct cause for de lag -'
Dr. Thoming smiled, 'I'll discuss it with you later, Dr. Ullen. Right now, Admiral Korsakoff wants information from you, with which we hope to end the war.'
'Exactly,' Korsakoff spoke in clipped tones as he met Ullen's mild gaze. 'Although a Martian, I presume you favor the victory of the principles of freedom and justice over the foul practices of Venusian tyranny.'
Ullen stared uncertainly, 'Dat sounds familiar - but I don't dink about it much. You mean, maybe, de war should end?'
'With victory, yes.'
'Oh, "victory," dat is just a silly word. History proves dat a war decided on military superiority only lays de groundwork for future wars of retaliation and revenge. I refer you to a very good essay on de subject by a James Calkins. It was published all de way back in 2050.'
'My dear sir!'
Ullen raised his voice in bland indifference to Johnnie's urgent whisperings. 'Now to end de war - really end it - you should say to de plain people of Venus, "It is unnecessary to fight. Let us just talk" -'
There was the slam of fist on desk and a muttered oath of frightful import. 'For God's sakes, Thorning, get what you want out of him. I give you five minutes.'
Thorning stifled his chuckle, 'Dr. Ullen, we want you to tell us what you know about the disintegrator.'
'Disintegrator?' Ullen put a puzzled finger to his cheek.
'The one you told Lieutenant Brewster of.'
'Ummmm- Oh! You mean de "fall-apart" weapon. I don't know nodding about it. De Martian historians mention it some times, but none of dem know about it - de technical side, dat is.'
The sandy-haired physicist nodded patiently, 'I know, I know. But what do they say? What kind of a weapon is it?'
'Well, de way dey talk about it, it makes de metals to fall to pieces. What is it you call de ding dat holds metals togedder, now?'
'Intra-molecular forces?'
Ullen frowned and then spoke thoughtfully, 'Maybe. I forgot what de Martian word is - except dat it's long. Anyway, dis weapon, it makes dis force dat holds de metals togedder not to exist anymore and it all falls apart in a powder. But it only works on de dree metals, iron, cobalt and - uh - de odder one!'
'Nickel,' prompted Johnnie, softly.
'Yes, yes, nickel!'
Thorning's eyes glittered, 'Aha, the ferromagnetic elements. There's an oscillating magnetic field mixed up in this, or I'm a Veenie. How about it, Ullen?'
The Martian sighed, 'Such crazy Eard words. - Let's see now, most of what I know about de weapon is from de work of Hogel Beg. It was - I'm pretty sure - in his "Cultural and Social History of de Bird Empire." It was a huge work in twenty-four volumes, but I always dought it was radder mediocre. His technique in de presentation of -'
'Please,' said Thorning, 'the weapon -'
'Oh, yes, dat!' He hitched himself higher in his chair and grimaced with the effort. 'He talks about electricity and it goes back and ford very fast - very fast, and its pressure-' He paused hopelessly, and regarded the scowling visage of the bearded Admiral naively, 'I dink de word is pressure, but I don't know, because it is hard to translate. De Martian word is "cranstad." Does dat help?'
'I think you mean "potential," Dr. Ullen!' Thorning sighed audibly.
'Well, if you say so. Anyway, dis "potential" changes also very fast and de two changes are synchronized somehow along wid magnetism dat - uh - shifts and dat's all I know about it.' He smiled uncertainly, 'I would like to go back now. It would be all right now, wouldn't it?'
The Admiral vouchsafed no answer, 'Do you make anything out of that mess, Doctor?'
'Damned little,' admitted the physicist, 'but it gives me a lead or two. We might try getting hold of this Beg's book, but there's not much hope. It will simply repeat what we've just heard. Dr. Ullen, are there any scientific works on your planet?'
The Martian saddened, 'No, Dr. Doming, dey were all destroyed during de Kalynian reaction. On Mars, we doroughly disbelieve in science. History has shown dat it comes from science no happiness.' He turned to the young Earthman at his side, 'Johnnie, let us go now, please.'
Korsakoff dismissed the two with a wave of the hand.
Ullen bent carefully over the closely-typed manuscript and inserted a word. He glanced up brightly at Johnnie Brewster, who shook his head and placed a hand on the Martian's arm. His brow furrowed more deeply.
'Ullen,' he said harshly, 'You're in trouble.'
'Eh? I? In trouble? Why, Johnnie, dat is not so. My book is coming along famously. De whole first volume, it is completed and, but for a bit of polishing, is ready for de printers.'
'Ullen, if you can't give the government definite information on the disintegrator, I won't answer for the consequences.'
'But I told all I knew-'
'It won't do. It's not enough. You've got to remember more, Ullen, you've got to.'
'But knowledge where dere is none is impossible to have -dat is an axiom.' Ullen sat upright in his seat, propping himself on a crutch.
'I know it,' Johnnie's mouth twisted in misery, 'but you've got to understand.
'The Venusians have control of space; our Asteroid garrisons have been wiped out, and last week Phobos and Deimos. fell. Communications between Earth and Luna are broken and God knows how Jong the Lunar squadron can hold out. Earth itself is scarcely secure and their bombings are becoming more serious- Oh, Ullen, don't you understand?'
The Martian's look of confusion deepened, 'Eard is losing?'
'God, yes!'
'Den give up. Dat is de logical ding to do. Why did you start at all - you stupid Eardmen.'
Johnnie ground his teeth, 'But if we have the disintegrator, we won't lose.'
Ullen shrugged, 'Oh, Johnnie, it gets wearisome to listen to de same old story. You Eardmen have one-track minds. Look, wouldn't it make you feel better to have me read you some of my manuscript? It would do your intellect good.'
'All right, Ullen, you've asked for it, and here's everything right out. If you don't tell Thorning what he wants to know, you're going to be arrested and tried for treason.'
There was a short silence, and then a confused stutter, T-treason. You mean dat I betray -' The historian removed his glasses and wiped them with shaking hand, 'It's not true. You're trying to frighten me.'
'Oh, no, I'm not. Korsakoff thinks you know more than you're telling. He's sure that you're either holding out for a price or, more likely, that you've sold out to the Veenies.'
'But Doming -'
Thorning isn't any too secure himself. He has his own skin to think of. Earth governments in moments of stress are not famous for being reasonable.' There were sudden tears in his eyes, 'Ullen, there must be something you can do. It's not only you - it's for Earth.'
Ullen's breathing whistled harshly, 'Dey tink I would sell my scientific knowledge. Is dat de kind of insult dey pay my sense of eddies; my scientific integrity?' His voice was thick with fury and for the first time since Johnnie knew him, he lapsed into guttural Martian. 'For dat, I say not a word,' he finished. 'Let dem put me in prison or shoot me, but dis insult I cannot forget.'
There was no mistaking the firmness in his eyes, and Johnnie's shoulders sagged. The Earthman didn't move at the glare of the signal light.
'Answer de light, Johnnie,' said the Martian, softly, 'dey are coming for me.'
In a moment, the room was crowded with green uniforms. Dr. Thorning and the two with him were the only ones present in civilian clothes.
Ullen struggled to his feet, 'Gentlemen, say nodding. I have heard dat it is dought dat I am selling what I know - selling for money.' He spat the words. 'It is a ding never before said of me - a ding I have not deserved. If you wish you can imprison me immediately, but I shall say nodding more - nor have any-ding furder to do wid de Eard government.'
A green-garbed official stepped forward immediately, but Dr. Thorning waved him back.
'Whoa, there, Dr. Ullen,' he said jovially, 'don't jump too soon. I've just come to ask if there isn't a single additional fact that you remember. Anything, no matter how insignificant-'
There was stony silence. Ullen leant heavily on his crutches but remained stolidly erect.
Dr. Thorning seated himself imperturbably upon the historian's desk, picked up the high stack of type-written pages, 'Ah, is this the manuscript young Brewster was telling me about.' He gazed at it curiously, 'Well, of course, you realize that your attitude will force the government to confiscate all this.'
'Eh?'.Ullen's stern expression melted into dismay. His crutch slipped and he dropped heavily into his seat.
The physicist warded off the other's feeble clutch, 'Keep your hands off, Dr. Ullen, I'm taking care of this.' He leafed through the pages with a rustling noise. 'You see, if you are arrested for treason, your writings become subversive.'
'Subversive!' Ullen's voice was hoarse, 'Dr. Doming, you don't know what you are saying. It is my - my great labor.' His voice caught huskily, 'Please, Dr. Doming, give me my manuscript.'
The other held it just beyond the Martian's shaking fingers.
'If-'he said.
'But I don't know!'
The sweat stood out on the historian's pale face. His voice came thickly. 'Time! Give me time! But let me dink - and don't, please don't harm dis manuscript.'
The other's fingers sank painfully into Ullen's shoulder, 'So help me, I burn your manuscript in five minutes, if-'
'Wait, I'll tell you. Somewhere - I don't know where - it was said dat in de weapon dey used a special metal for some of de wiring. I don't know what metal, but water spoiled it and had to be kept away - also air. It -'
'Holy jumping Jupiter,' came the sudden shout from one of Thorning's companions. 'Chief, don't you remember Aspar-tier's work on sodium wiring in argon atmosphere five years ago-'
Dr, Thorning's eyes were deep with thought, 'Wait - wait -wait - Damn! It was staring us in the face -'
'I know,' shrieked Ullen suddenly. 'It was in Karisto. He was discussing de fall of Gallonie and dat was one of de minor causes - de lack of dat metal - and den he mentioned -'
He was talking to an empty room, and for a while he was silent in puzzled astonishment.
And then, 'My manuscript!' He salvaged it from where it lay scattered over the floor, hobbling painfully about, smoothing each wrinkled sheet with care.
'De barbarians - to treat a great scientific work so!'
Ullen opened still another drawer and scrabbled through its contents. He closed it and looked about peevishly, 'Johnnie, where did I put dat bibliography? Did you see it?'
He looked toward the window, 'Johnnie!'
Johnnie Brewster said, 'Wait a while, Ullen. Here they come now.'
The streets below were a burst of color. In a long, stiffly-moving line the Green of the Navy paraded down the avenue, the air above them snow-thick with confetti, hail-thick with ticker-tape. The roar of the crowd was dull, muted.
'Ah, de foolish people,' mused Ullen. 'Dey were happy just like dis when de war started and dere was a parade just like dis - and now anodder one. Silly!' He stumped back to his chair.
Johnnie followed, 'The government is naming a new museum after you, isn't it?'
'Yes,' was the dry reply. He peered helplessly about under the desk, 'De Ullen War Museum - and it will be filled wid ancient weapons, from stone knife to anti-aircraft gun. Dat is your queer Eard sense of de fitness of dings. Where in dun-deration is dat bibliography?'
'Here,' said Johnnie, withdrawing the document from Ul-len's vest pocket. 'Our victory was due to your weapon, ancient to you, so it is fit in a way.'
'Victory! Sure! Until Venus rearms and reprepares and re-fights for revenge. All history shows - but never mind. It is useless, dis talk.' He settled himself deeply in his chair, 'Here, let me show you a real victory. Let me read you some of de first volume of my work. It's already in print, you know.'
Johnnie laughed, 'Go ahead, Ullen. Right now I'm even willing to listen to you read your entire twelve volumes - word for word.'
And Ullen smiled gently. 'It would be good for your intellect,' he said.



***



'History,' you will notice, mentions Hitler's end. It was written in the first days of September 1940, when Hitler seemed at the very peak of his success. France was defeated and occupied and Britain was at bay and seemed unlikely to survive. - Still, I had no doubt as to his ultimate defeat. I did not visualize his ending in suicide, however, I thought that like Napoleon and the Kaiser, he would end his life in exile. Madagascar was the place I picked.
Also mentioned in the story are 'the tiny "Drops of Death," the highly-publicized radioactive bombs that noiselessly and inexorably ate out a fifteen-foot crater wherever they fell.'
By the time I wrote the story, uranium fission had been discovered and announced. I had not yet yeard of it, however, and I was unaware that reality was about to outstrip my prized science fictional imagination.
On October 23, 1940, I visited Campbell and outlined to him another robot story I wanted to write, a story I planned to call 'Reason.' Campbell was completely enthusiastic. I had trouble writing it and had to start over several times, but eventually it was done, and on November 18 I submitted it to John. He accepted it on the twenty-second, and it appeared in the April 1941 issue of Astounding.
It was the third story of mine that he had accepted and the first in which he did not ask for a revision. (He told me, in fact, that he had liked it so well, he had almost decided to pay me a bonus.)
With 'Reason,' the 'positronic robot' series was fairly launched, and my two most successful characters yet, Gregory Powell and Mike Donovan (improvements on Turner and Snead of 'Ring Around the Sun') made their appearance. Eventually, 'Reason' and others of the series that were to follow, together with 'Robbie,' which Campbell had rejected, were to appear in I, Robot.
The success of 'Reason' didn't mean that I was to have no further rejections from Campbell.
On December 6, 1940, influenced by the season and never stopping to think that a Christmas story must sell no later than July in order to make the Christmas issue, I began 'Christmas on Ganymede.' I submitted it to him on the twenty-third, but the holiday season did not affect his critical judgment. He re- jected it.
I tried Pohl next, and, as was happening so often that year, he took it. In this case, for reasons I will describe later, the acceptance fell through. I eventually sold it the next summer (June 27, 1941, the proper time of year) to Startling Stories, the younger, sister magazine of Thrilling Wonder Stones.






Christmas on Ganymede [6]


Olaf Johnson hummed nasally to himself and his china-blue eyes were dreamy as he surveyed the stately fir tree in the corner of the library. Though the library was the largest single room in the Dome, Olaf felt it none too spacious for the occasion. Enthusiastically he dipped into the huge crate at his side and took out the first roll of red-and-green crepe paper.
What sudden burst of sentiment had inspired the Gany-medan Products Corporation, Inc. to ship a complete collection of Christmas decorations to the Dome, he did not pause to inquire. Olaf's was a placid disposition, and in his self-imposed job as chief Christmas decorator, he was content with his lot.
He frowned suddenly and muttered a curse. The General Assembly signal light was flashing on and off hysterically. With a hurt air Olaf laid down the tack-hammer he had just lifted, then the roll of crepe paper, picked some tinsel out of his hair and left for officers quarters.
Commander Scott Pelham was in his deep armchair at the head of the table when Olaf entered. His stubby fingers were drumming unrhythmically upon the glass-topped table. Olaf met the commander's hotly furious eyes without fear, for nothing had gone wrong in his department in twenty Gany-medan revolutions.
The room filled rapidly with men, and Pelham's eyes hardened as he counted noses in one sweeping glance.
'We're all here. Men, we face a crisis!'
There was a vague stir. Olaf's eyes sought the ceiling and he relaxed. Crises hit the Dome once a revolution, on the average. Usually they turned out to be a sudden rise in the quota of oxite to be gathered, or the inferior quality of the last batch of karen leaves. He stiffened, however, at the next words.
'In connection with the crisis, I have one question to ask.' Pelham's voice was a deep baritone, and it rasped unpleasantly when he was angry. 'What dirty imbecilic troublemaker has been telling those blasted Ossies fairy tales?"
Olaf cleared his throat nervously and thus immediately became the center of attention. His Adam's apple wobbled in sudden alarm and his forehead wrinkled into a washboard. He shivered.
'I - I-' he stuttered, quickly fell silent. His long fingers made a bewildered gesture of appeal. 'I mean I was out there yesterday, after the last - uh - supplies of karen leaves, on account the Ossies were slow and -'
A deceptive sweetness entered Pelham's voice. He smiled.
'Did you tell those natives about Santa Claus, Olaf?'
The smile looked uncommonly like a wolfish leer and Olaf broke down. He nodded convulsively.
'Oh, you did? Well, well, you told them about Santa Claus! He comes down in a sleigh that flies through the air with eight reindeer pulling it, huh?'
'Well - er - doesn't he?' Olaf asked unhappily.
'And you drew pictures of the reindeer, just to make sure there was no mistake. Also, he has a long white beard and red clothes with white trimmings.'
'Yeah, that's right,' said Olaf, his face puzzled.
'And he has a big bag, chock full of presents for good little' boys and girls, and he brings it down the chimney and puts presents inside stockings.'
'Sure.'
'You also told them he's about due, didn't you? One more revolution and he's going to visit us.'
Olaf smiled weakly. 'Yeah, Commander, I meant to tell you. I'm fixing up the tree and -'
'Shut up!' The commander was breathing hard in a whistling sort of way. 'Do you know what those Ossies have thought of?'
'No, Commander.'
Pelham leaned across the table toward Olaf and shouted:
They want Santa Claus to visit them!'
Someone laughed and changed it quickly into a strangling cough at the commander's raging stare.
'And if Santa Claus doesn't visit them, the Ossies are going to quit work!' He repeated, 'Quit cold - strike!'
There was no laughter, strangled or otherwise, after that. If there were more than one thought among the entire group, it didn't show itself. Olaf expressed that thought:
'But what about the quota?'
'Well, what about it?' snarled Pelham. 'Do I have to draw pictures for you? Ganymedan Products has to get one hundred tons of wolframite, eighty tons of karen leaves and fifty tons of oxite every year, or it loses its franchise. I suppose there isn't anyone here who doesn't know that. It so happens that the current year ends in two Ganymedan revolutions, and we're five per cent behind schedule as it is.'
There was pure, horrified silence.
'And now the Ossies won't work unless they get Santa Claus. No work, no quota, no franchise - no jobs! Get that, you low-grade morons. When the company loses its franchise, we lose the best-paying jobs in the System. Kiss them good-bye, men, unless -'
He paused, glared steadily at Olaf, and added:
'Unless, by next revolution, we have a flying sleigh, eight reindeer and a Santa Claus. And by every cosmic speck in the rings of Saturn, we're going to have just that, especially a Santa!'
The faces turned ghastly pale.
'Got someone in mind, Commander?' asked someone in a voice that was three-quarters croak.
'Yes, as a matter of fact, I have.'
He sprawled back in his chair. Olaf Johnson broke into a sudden sweat as he found himself staring at the end of a pointing forefinger.
'Aw, Commander!' he quavered.
The pointing finger never moved.
Pelham tramped into the foreroom, removed-his oxygen nosepiece and the cold cylinders attached to it. One by one he cast off thick woolen outer garments and, with a final, weary sigh, jerked off a pair of heavy knee-high space boots.
Sim Pierce paused in his careful inspection of the latest batch of karen leaves and cast a hopeful glance over his spectacles.
'Well?' he asked.
Pelham shrugged. 'I promised them Santa. What else could I do? I also doubled sugar rations, so they're back on the job - for the moment.'
'You mean till the Santa we promised doesn't show up.' Pierce straightened and waved a long karen leaf at the commander's face for emphasis. 'This is the silliest thing I ever heard of. It can't be done. There ain't no Santa Claus!'
Try telling that to the Ossies.' Pelham slumped into a chair and his expression became stonily bleak. 'What's Benson doing?'
'You mean that flying sleigh he says he can rig up?' Pierce held a leaf up to the light and peered at it critically. 'He's a crackpot, if you ask me. The old buzzard went down to the sub-level this morning and he's been there ever since. All I know is that he's taken the spare lectro-dissociator apart. If anything happens to the regular, it just means that we're without oxygen.'
'Well,' Pelham rose heavily, 'for my part I hope we do choke. It would be an easy way out of this whole mess. I'm going down below.'
He stumped out and slammed the door behind him.
In the sub-level he gazed about in bewilderment, for the room was littered with gleaming chrome-steel machine parts. It took him some time to recognize the mess as the remains of what had been a compact, snugly built lectro-dissociator the day before. In the center, in anachronistic contrast, stood a dusty wooden sleigh atop rust-red runners. From beneath it came the sound of hammering.
'Hey, Benson!' called Pelham.
A grimy, sweat-streaked face pushed out from underneath the sleigh, and a stream of tobacco juice shot toward Benson's ever-present cuspidor.
'What are you shouting like that for?' he complained. 'This is delicate work.'
'What the devil is that weird contraption?' demanded Pel-ham.
'Flying sleigh. My own idea, too.' The light of enthusiasm shone in Benson's watery eyes, and the quid in his mouth shifted from cheek to cheek as he spoke. 'The sleigh was brought here in the old days, when they thought Ganymede was covered with snow like the other Jovian moons. All I have to do is fix a few gravo-repulsors from the dissociator to the bottom and that'll make it weightless when the current's on. Compressed air-jets will do the rest.'
The commander chewed his lower lip dubiously.
'Will it work?'
'Sure it will. Lots of people have thought of using repulsors in air travel, but they're inefficient, especially in heavy gravity fields. Here on Ganymede, with a field of one-third gravity and a thin atmosphere, a child could run it. Even Johnson could run it, though I wouldn't mourn if he fell off and broke his blasted neck.'
'All right, then, look here. We've got lots of this native purple-wood. Get Charlie Finn and tell him to put that sleigh on a platform of it. He's to have it extend about twenty feet or more frontward, with a railing around the part that projects.'
Benson spat and scowled through the stringy hair over his eyes.
'What's the idea, Commander?'
Pelham's laughter came in short, harsh barks.
'Those Ossies are expecting reindeer, and reindeer they're going to have. Those animals will have to stand on something, won't they?'
'SureÖ But wait, hold on! There aren't any reindeer on Ganymede.'
Commander Pelham paused on his way out. His eyes narrowed unpleasantly as they always did when he thought of Olaf Johnson.
'Olaf is out rounding up eight spiny backs for us. They've got four feet, a head on one end and a tail on the other. That's close enough for the Ossies.'
The old engineer chewed this information and chuckled nastily.
'Good! I wish the fool joy of his job.'
'So do I,' gritted Pelham.
He stalked out as Benson, still leering, slid underneath the sleigh.
The commander's description of a spinyback was concise and accurate, but it left out several interesting details. For one thing, a spinyback has a long, mobile snout, two large ears that wave back and forth gently and two emotional purple eyes. The males have pliable spines of a deep crimson color along the backbone that seem to delight the female of the species.
Combine these with a scaly, muscular tail and a brain by no means mediocre, and you have a spinyback - or at least you have one if you can catch one.
It was just such a thought that occurred to Olaf Johnson as he sneaked down from the rocky eminence toward the herd of twenty-five spinybacks grazing on the sparse, gritty undergrowth. The nearest spinies looked up as Olaf, bundled in fur and grotesque with attached oxygen nosepiece, approached. However, spinies have no natural enemies, so they merely gazed at the figure with languidly disapproving eyes and returned to their crunchy but nourishing fare.
Olaf's notions on bagging big game were sketchy. He fumbled in his pocket for a lump of sugar, held it out and said:
'Here, pussy, pussy, pussy, pussy, pussy! '
The ears of the nearest spinie twitched in annoyance. Olaf came closer and held out the sugar again.
'Come, bossy! Come, bossy!'
The spinie caught sight of the sugar and rolled his eyes at it. His snout twitched as he spat out his last mouthful of vegetation and ambled over. With neck stretched out, he sniffed. Then, using a rapid, expert motion, he struck at the outheld palm and flipped the lump into his mouth. Olaf's other hand whistled down upon nothingness.
With a hurt expression, Olaf held out another piece.
'Here, Prince! Here, Fido!'
The spinie made a low, tremulous sound deep in his throat. It was a sound of pleasure. Evidently this strange monstrosity before him, having gone insane, intended to feed him these bits of concentrated succulence forever. He snatched and was back as quickly as the first time. But, since Olaf had held on firmly this time, the spinie almost bagged half a finger as well.
Olaf's yell lacked a bit of the nonchalance necessary at such times. Nevertheless, a bite that can be felt through thick gloves is a bite!
He advanced boldly upon the spinie. There are some things that stir the Johnson blood and bring up the ancient spirit of the Vikings. Having one's finger bitten, especially by an unearthly animal, is one of these.
There was an uncertain look in the spinie's eyes as he backed slowly away. There weren't any white cubes being offered any more and he wasn't quite sure what was going to happen now. The uncertainty vanished with a suddenness he did not expect, when two glove-muffled hands came down upon his ears and jerked. He let out a high-pitched yelp and charged forward.
A spinie has a certain sense of dignity. He doesn't like to have his ears pulled, particularly when other spinies, including several unattached females, have formed a ring and are looking on.
The Earthman went over backward and remained in that position for awhile. Meantime, the spinie backed away a few feet in a gentlemanly manner and allowed Johnson to get to his feet.
The old Viking blood frothed still higher in Olaf. After rubbing the hurt spot where he had landed on his oxygen cylinder, he jumped, forgetting to allow for Ganymedan gravity. He sailed five feet over the spinie's back.
There was awe in the animal's eye as he watched Olaf, for it was a stately jump. But there was a certain amount of bewilderment as well. There seemed to be no purpose to the maneuver.
Olaf landed on his back again and got the cylinder in the same place. He was beginning to feel a little embarrassed. The sounds that came from the circle of onlookers were remarkably like snickers.
'Laugh!' he muttered bitterly. 'I haven't even begun to fight yet.'
He approached the spinie slowly, cautiously. He circled, watching for his opening. So did the spinie. Olaf feinted and the spinie ducked. Then the spinie reared and Olaf ducked.
Olaf kept remembering new profanity all the time. The husky 'Ur-r-r-r-r' that came out the spinie's throat seemed to lack the brotherly spirit that is usually associated with Christmas.
There was a sudden, swishing sound. Olaf felt something collide with his skull, just behind his left ear. This time he turned a back somersault and landed on the nape of his neck. There was a chorused whinny from the onlookers, and the spinie waved his tail triumphantly.
Olaf got rid of the impression that he was floating through a star-studden unlimited space and wavered to his feet,
'Listen,' he objected, 'using your tail is a foul!'
He leaped back as the tail shot forward again, then flung himself forward in a diving tackle. He grabbed at the spinie's feet and felt the animal come down on his back with an indignant yelp.
Now it was a case of Earth muscles against Ganymedan muscles, and Olaf became a man of brute strength. He struggled up, and the spinie found himself slung over the stranger's shoulders.
The spinie objected vociferously and tried to prove his objections by a judicious whip of the tail. But he was in an inconvenient position and the stroke whistled harmlessly over Olaf's head.
The other spinies made way for the Earthman with saddened expressions. Evidently they were all good friends of the captured animal and hated to see him lose a fight. They returned to their meal in philosophic resignation, plainly convinced that it was kismet.
On the other side of the rocky ledge, Olaf reached his prepared cave. There was the briefest of scrambling struggles before he managed to sit down hard on the spinie's head and put enough knots into rope to hold him there.
A few hours later, when he had coralled his eighth spiny-back, he possessed the technique that comes of long practice. He could have given a Terrestrial cowboy valuable pointers on throwing a maverick. Also, he could have given a Terrestrial stevedore lessons in simple and compound swearing.
'Twas the night before Christmas - and all through the Ganymedan Dome there was deafening noise and bewildering excitement, like an exploding nova equipped for sound. Around the rusty sleigh, mounted on its huge platform of purplewood, five Earthmen were staging a battle royal with a spinie.
The spinie had definite views about most things, and one of his stubbornest and most definite views was that he would never go where he didn't want to go. He made that clear by flailing one head, one tail, three spines and four legs in every possible direction, with all possible force.
But the Earthmen insisted, and not gently. Despite loud, agonized squeaks, the spinie was lifted onto the platform, hauled into place and harnessed into hopeless helplessness.
'Okay!' Peter Benson yelled. 'Pass the bottle.'
Holding the spinie's snout with one hand, Benson waved the bottle under it with the other. The spinie quivered eagerly and whined tremulously. Benson poured some of the liquid down the animal's throat. There was a gurgling swallow and an appreciative whinny. The spinie's neck stretched out for more.
Benson sighed. 'Our best brandy, too.'
He up-ended the bottle and withdrew it half empty. The spinie, eyes whirling in their sockets rapidly, did what seemed an attempt at a gay jig. It didn't last long, however, for Gany-medan metabolism is almost immediately affected by alcohol. His muscles locked in a drunken rigor and, with a loud hiccup, he went out on his feet.
'Drag out the next!' yelled Benson.
In an hour the eight spinybacks were so many cataleptic statues. Forked sticks were tied around their heads as antlers. The effect was crude and sketchy, but it would do.
As Benson opened his mouth to ask where Olaf Johnson was, that worthy showed up in the arms of three comrades, and he was putting up as stiff a fight as any spinie. His objections, however, were highly articulate.
'I'm not going anywhere in this costume!' he roared, gouging at the nearest eye. 'You hear me?'
There certainly was cause for objection. Even at his best, Olaf had never been a heart-throb. But in his present condition, he resembled a hybrid between a spinie's nightmare and a Picassian conception of a patriarch.
He wore the conventional costume of Santa. His clothes were as red as red tissue paper sewed onto his space coat could make it. The 'ermine' was as white as cotton wool, which it was. His beard, more cotton wool glued into a linen foundation, hung loosely from his ears. With that below and his oxygen nosepiece above, even the strongest were forced to avert their eyes.
Olaf had not been shown a mirror. But, between what he could see of himself and what his instinct told him, he would have greeted a good, bright lightning bolt like a brother.
By fits and starts, he was hauled to the sleigh. Others pitched in to help, until Olaf was nothing but a smothered squirm and muffled voice.
'Leggo,' he mumbled. 'Leggo and come at me one by one. Come on!'
He tried to spar a bit, to point his dare. But the multiple grips upon him left him unable to wriggle a finger.
'Get in!' ordered Benson.
'You go to hell!' gasped Olaf. 'I'm not getting into any patented short-cut to suicide, and you can take your bloody flying sleigh and -'
'Listen,' interrupted Benson, 'Commander Pelham is waiting for you at the other end. He'll skin you alive if you don't show up in half an hour.'
'Commander Pelham can take the sleigh sideways and -'
'Then think of your job! Think of a hundred and fifty a week. Think of every other year off with pay. Think of Hilda, back on Earth, who isn't going to marry you without a job. Think of all that!'
Johnson thought, snarled. He thought some more, got into the sleigh, strapped down his bag and turned on the gravo-repulsors. With a horrible curse, he opened the rear jet.
The sleigh dashed forward and he caught himself from going backward, over and out of the sleigh, by two-thirds of a whisker. He held onto the sides thereafter, watching the surrounding hills as they rose and fell with each lurch of the unsteady sleigh.
As the wind rose, the undulations grew more marked. And when Jupiter came up, its yellow light brought out every jag and crag of the rocky ground, toward every one of which, in turn, the sleigh seemed headed. And by the time the giant planet had shoved completely over the horizon, the curse of drink - which departs from the Ganymedan organism just as quickly as it descends - began removing itself from the spinies.
The hindmost spinie came out of it first, tasted the inside of his mouth, winced and swore off drink. Having made that resolution, he took in his immediate surroundings languidly. They made no immediate impression on him. Only gradually was the fact forced upon him that his footing, whatever it was, was not the usual stable one of solid Ganymede. It swayed and shifted, which seemed very unusual.
Yet he might have attributed this unsteadiness to his recent orgy, had he not been so careless as to drop his glance over the railing to which he was anchored. No spinie ever died of heart-failure, as far as is recorded, but, looking downward, this one almost did.
His agonized screech of horror and despair brought the other spinies into full, if headachy, consciousness. For a while there was a confused blur of squawking conversation as the animals tried to get the pain out of their heads and the facts in. Both aims were achieved and a stampede was organized. It wasn't much of a stampede, because the spinies were anchored tightly. But, except for the fact that they got nowhere, they went through all the motions of a full gallop. And the sleigh went crazy.
Olaf grabbed his beard a second before it let go of his ears.
'Hey!' he shouted.
It was something like saying 'Tut, tut' to a hurricane.,
The sleigh kicked, bucked and did a hysterical tango. It made sudden spurts, as if inspired to dash its wooden brains out against Ganymede's crust. Meanwhile Olaf prayed, swore, wept and jiggled all the compressed air jets at once.
Ganymede whirled and Jupiter was a wild blur. Perhaps it was the spectacle of Jupiter doing the shimmy that steadied the spinies. More likely it was the fact that they just didn't give a hang any more. Whatever it was, they halted, made lofty farewell speeches to one another, confessed their sins and waited for deathÖ
The sleigh steadied and Olaf resumed his breathing once more. Only to stop again as he viewed the curious spectacle of the hills and solid ground up above, and black sky and swollen Jupiter down below.
It was at this point that he, too, made his peace with the eternal and awaited the end.
'Ossie' is short for ostrich, and that's what native Gany-medans look like, except that their necks are shorter, their heads are larger and their feathers look as if they were about to fall out by the roots. To this, add a pair of scrawny, feathered arms with three stubby fingers apiece. They can speak English, but when you hear them, you wish they couldn't.
There were fifty of them in the low purplewood structure that was their 'meeting hall.' On the mound of raised dirt in the front of the room - dark with the smoky dimness of burning purplewood torches fetid to boot - sat Commander Scott Pelham and five of his men..Before them strutted the frowziest Ossie of them all, inflating his huge chest with rhythmic, booming sounds.
He stopped for a moment and pointed to a ragged hole in the ceiling.
'Look!' he squawked. 'Chimney. We make. Sannycaws come in.'
Pelham grunted approval. The Ossie clucked happily. He pointed to the little sacks of woven grass that hung from the walls.
'Look! Stockies. Sannycaws put presets!'
'Yeah,' said Pelham unenthusiastically. 'Chimney and stockings. Very nice.' He spoke out of the corner of his mouth to Sim Pierce, who sat next to him: 'Another half-hour in this dump will kill me. When is that fool coming?'
Pierce stirred uneasily.
'Listen,' he said, 'I've been doing some figuring. We're safe on everything but the karen leaves, and we're still four tons short on that. If we can get this fool business over with in the next hour, so we can start the next shift and work the Ossies at double, we can make it.' He leaned back. 'Yes, I think we can make it.'
'Just about,' replied Pelham gloomily. 'That's if Johnson gets here without pulling another bloomer.'
The Ossie was talking again, for Ossies like to talk. He said:
'Every year Kissmess comes. Kissmess nice, evvybody friendly. Ossie like Kissmess. You like Kissmess?'
'Yean, fine,' Pelham snarled politely. 'Peace on Ganymede, good will toward men - especially Johnson. Where the devil is that idiot, anyhow?'
He fell into an annoyed fidget, while the Ossie jumped up and down a few times in a thoughtful sort of manner, evidently for the exercise of it. He continued the jumping, varying it with little hopping dance steps, till Pelham's fists began making strangling gestures. Only an excited squawk from the hole in the wall dignified by the term 'window' kept Pelham from committing Ossie-slaughter.
Ossies swarmed about and the Earthmen fought for a view.
Against Jupiter's great yellowness was outlined a flying sleigh, complete with reindeers. It was only a tiny thing, but there was no doubt about it. Santa Claus was coming.
There was only one thing wrong with the picture. The sleigh, 'reindeer' and all, while plunging ahead at a terrific speed, was flying upside down.
The Ossies dissolved into squawking cacophony.
'Sannycaws! Sannycaws! Sannycaws!'
The scrambled out the window like so many animated dust-mops gone mad. Pelham and his men used the low door.
The sleigh was approaching, growing larger, lurching from side to side and vibrating like an off-center flywheel. Olaf Johnson was a tiny figure holding on desperately to the side of the sleigh with both hands.
Pelham was shouting wildly, incoherently, choking on the thin atmosphere every time he forgot to breathe through his nose. Then he stopped and stared in horror. The sleigh, almost life-size now, was dipping down. If it had been an arrow shot by William Tell, it could not have aimed between Pelham's eyes more accurately.
'Everybody down!' he shrieked, and dropped.
The wind of the sleigh's passage whistled keenly and brushed his face. Olaf's voice could be heard for an instant, high-pitched and indistinct. Compressed air spurted, leaving tracks of condensing water vapor.
Pelham lay quivering, hugging Ganymede's frozen crust. Then, knees shaking like a Hawaiian hula-girl, he rose slowly. The Ossies who had scattered before the plunging vehicle had assembled again. Off in the distance, the sleigh was veering back.
Pelham watched as it swayed and hovered, still rotating. It lurched toward the dome, curved off to one side, turned back, and gathered speed.
Inside that sleigh, Olaf worked like a demon. Straddling his legs wide, he shifted his weight desperately. Sweating and cursing, trying hard not to look 'downward' at Jupiter, he urged the sleigh into wilder and wilder swings. It was wobbling through an angle of 180 degrees now, and Olaf felt his stomach raise strenuous objections.
Holding his breath, he leaned hard with his right foot and felt the sleigh swing far over. At the extremity of that swing, he released the gravo-repulsor and, in Ganymede's weak gravity, the sleigh jerked downward. Naturally, since the vehicle was bottom-heavy due to the metal gravo-repulsor beneath, it righted itself as it fell.
But this was little comfort to Commander Pelham, who found himself once more in the direct path of the sleigh.
'Down!' he yelled, and dropped again.
The sleigh whi-i-ished overhead, came up against a huge boulder with a crack, bounced twenty-five feet into the air, came down with a rush and a bang and Olaf fell over the railing and out.
Santa Claus had arrived.
With a deep, shuddering breath, Olaf swung his bag over his shoulders, adjusted his beard and patted one of the silently suffering spinies on the head. Death might be coming - in fact; Olaf could hardly wait - but he was going to die on his feet nobly, like a Johnson.
Inside the shack, into which the Ossies had once more swarmed, a thump announced the arrival of Santa's bag on the roof, and a second thud the arrival of Santa himself. A ghastly face appeared through the makeshift hole in the ceiling.
'Merry Christmas!' it croaked, and tumbled through.
Olaf landed on his oxygen cylinders, as usual, and got them in the usual place.
The Ossies jumped up and down like rubber balls with the itch.
Olaf limped heavily toward the first stocking and deposited the garishly colored sphere he withdrew from his bag, one of the many that had originally been intended as a Christmas tree ornament. One by one he deposited the rest in every available stocking.
Having completed his job, he dropped into an exhausted squat, from which position he watched subsequent proceedings with a glazed and fishy eye. The jolliness and belly-shaking good humor, traditionally characteristic of Santa Claus, were absent from this one with remarkable thoroughness.
The Ossies made up for it by their wild ecstasy. Until Olaf had deposited the last globe, they had kept their silence and their seats. But when he had finished, the air heaved and writhed under the stresses of the discordant screeches that arose. In half a second the hand of each Ossie contained a globe.
They chattered among themselves furiously, handling the globes carefully and hugging them close to their chests. Then they compared one with another, flocking about to gaze at particularly good ones.
The frowziest Ossie approached Pelham and plucked at the commander's sleeve. 'Sannycaws good,' he cackled. 'Look, he leave eggs!' He stared reverently at his sphere and said: 'Pit-tier'n Ossie eggs. Must be Sannycaws eggs, huh?'
His skinny finger punched Pelham in the stomach.
'No!' yowled Pelham vehemently. 'Hell, no!'
But the Ossie wasn't listening. He plunged the globe deep into the warmth of his feathers and said:
'Pitty colors. How long take for little Sannycaws come out? And what little Sannycaws eat?' He looked up. 'We take good care. We teach little Scannycaws, make him smart and full of brain like Ossie.'
Pierce grabbed Commander Pelham's arm.
'Don't argue with them,' he whispered frantically. 'What do you care if they think those are Santa Claus eggs? Come on! If we work like maniacs, we can still make the quota. Let's get started.'
'That's right,' Pelham admitted. He turned to the Ossie. Tell everyone to get going.' He spoke clearly and loudly. 'Work now. Do you understand? Hurry, hurry, hurry! Come on!'
He motioned with his arms. But the frowzy Ossie had come to a sudden halt. He said slowly:
'We work, but Johnson says Kissmess come evvy year.'
'Isn't one Christmas enough for you?' Pelham rasped.
'No!' squawked the Ossie. 'We want Sannycaws next year. Get more eggs. And next year more eggs. And next year. And next year. And next year. More eggs. More little Sannycaws eggs. If Sannycaws not come, we not work.'
'That's a long time off,' said Pelham. 'We'll talk about it then. By that time I'll either have gone completely crazy, or you'll have forgotten all about it.'
Pierce opened his mouth, closed it, open his mouth, closed it, opened it and finally managed to speak.
'Commander, they want him to come every year.'
'I know. They won't remember by next year, though.'
'But you don't get it. A year to them is one Ganymedan revolution around Jupiter. In Earth time, that's seven days and three hours. They want Santa Claus to come every week.' 'Every week!' Pelham gulped. 'Johnson told them -' For a moment everything turned sparkling somersaults before his eyes. He choked, and automatically his eye sought Olaf.
Olaf turned cold to the marrow of his bones and rose to his feet apprehensively, sidling toward the door. There he stopped as a sudden recollection of tradition hit him. Beard a-dangle, he croaked:
'Merry Christmas to all, and to all a good night!' He made for the sleigh as if all the imps of Hades were after him. The imps weren't, but Commander Scott Pelham was.



***



In January of 1941 (the month in which I attained my majority), I undertook something new - a collaboration.
Fred Pohl, after all, was not merely an editor. He was also a budding writer. He has since come to be a giant in the field, but in those early days he was struggling along with only the sort of meager success I was having. Alone, and in collaboration with other Futurians, he turned out stories under a variety of pseudonyms. The one he used most frequently was 'James MacCreigh.'
As it happened, he had written, under that pseudonym, a small fantasy called 'The Little Man on the Subway,' which he apparently-had hopes for but couldn't get right. He asked me if I would rewrite it, and the request flattered me. Besides, I was still trying to get into Unknown, and if I couldn't do it on my own, maybe I could do it by way of a collaboration. I wasn't proud - at least as far as fantasy was concerned.
I took on the task and did it virtually at a sitting. Doing it easily didn't help, however. I submitted it to Campbell for Unknown on January 27, 1941, and he rejected it. I had to hand it back to Pohl.
Pohl, however, with the true agent's soul, never gave up, and in 1950, long after I had utterly forgotten it, he managed to place it with a small magazine called Fantasy Book.






The Little Man on the Subway (with James MacCreigh) [7]


Subway stations are places where people usually get out, so when no one left the first car at Atlantic Avenue station, Conductor Cullen of the I.R.T. began to get worried. In fact, no one had left the first car from the time the run to Flatbush had begun - though dozens were getting on all the time.
Odd! Very odd! It was the kind of proposition that made well-bred conductors remove their caps and scratch their heads. Conductor Cullen did so. It didn't help, but he repeated the process at Bergen Street, the next station, where again the first car lost not one of its population. And at Grand Army Plaza, he added to the headscratching process a few rare old Gaelic words that had passed down from father to son for hundreds of years. They ionized the surrounding atmosphere, but otherwise did not affect the situation.
At Eastern Parkway, Cullen tried an experiment. He carefully refrained from opening the first car's doors at all. He leaned forward eagerly, twisted his head and watched - and was treated to nothing short of a miracle. The New York subway rider is neither shy, meek nor modest, and doors that do not open immediately or sooner are helped on their way by sundry kicks. But this time there was not a kick, not a shriek, not even a modified yell. Cullen's eyes popped.
He was getting angry. At Franklin Avenue, where he again contacted the Express, he flung open the doors and swore at the crowd. Every door spouted commuters of both sexes and all ages, except that terrible first car. At those doors, three men and a very young girl got on, though Cullen could plainly see the slight bulging of the walls that the already super-crowded condition of the car had caused.
For the rest of the trip to Flatbush Avenue, Cullen ignored the first car completely, concentrating on that last stop where everyone would have to get off. Everyone! President, Church and Beverly Road were visited and passed, and Cullen found himself counting the stations to the Flatbush terminus.
They seemed like such a nice bunch of passengers, too. They read their newspapers, stared into the whirling blackness out the window, or at the girl's legs across the way, or at nothing at all, quite like ordinary people. Only, they didn't want to get out. They didn't even want to get into the next car, where empty seats filled the place. Imagine New Yorkers resisting the impulse to pass from one car to the other, and missing the chance to leave the doors open for the benefit of the draft.
But it was Flatbush Avenue! Cullen rubbed his hands, slammed the doors open and yelled in his best unintelligible manner, 'Lasstop!' He repeated it two or three times hoarsely and several in that damned first car looked up at him. There was reproach in their eyes. Have you never heard of the Mayor's anti-noise campaign, they seemed to say.
The last other passenger had come out of the train, and the scattered new ones were coming in. There were a few curious looks at the jammed car, but not too many. The New Yorker considers everything he cannot understand a publicity stunt.
Cullen fell back on his Gaelic once more and dashed up the platform toward the motorman's booth. He needed moral assistance. The motorman should have been out of his cab, preparing for his next trip, but he wasn't. Cullen could see him through the glass of the door, leaning on the controls and staring vacantly at the bumper-stop ahead.
'Gus!' cried Cullen. 'Come out! There's a hell of-'
At that point, his tongue skidded to a halt, because it wasn't Gus. It was a little old man, who smiled politely and twiddled his fingers in greeting.
Patrick Cullen's Irish soul rebelled. With a yelp, he grabbed the edge of the door and tried to shove it open. He should have known that wouldn't work. So, taking a deep breath and commending said Irish soul to God, he made for the open door and ploughed into the mass of haunted humans in that first car. Momentum carried him six feet, and then there he stuck. Behind him, those he had knocked down picked themselves up from the laps of their fellow-travelers, apologized with true New York courtesy (consisting of a growl, a grunt, and a grimace) and returned to their papers.
Then, caught helplessly, he heard the Dispatcher's bell. It was time for his own train to be on its way. Duty called! With a superhuman effort, he inched toward the door, but it closed before he could get there, and the train commenced to move.
It occurred to Cullen that he had missed a report for the first time, and he said, 'Damn!' After the train had travelled some fifty feet, it came to him that they were going the wrong way, and this time he said nothing.
After all, what was there to say - even in the purest of Gaelic.
How could a train go the wrong way at Flatbush Ave. There were no further tracks. There was no further tunnel. There was a bumper-stop to prevent eccentric motormen from trying to bore one. It was absurd. Even the Big Deal couldn't do it.
But there they were!
There were stations in this new tunnel, too - cute little small ones just large enough for one car. But that was all right, because only one car was travelling. The rest had somehow become detached, presumably to make the routine trip to Bronx Park.
There were maybe a dozen stations on the line - with curious names. Cullen noticed only a few, because he found it difficult to keep his eyes from going out of focus. One was Archangel Boulevard; another Seraph Road; still another Cherub Plaza.
And then, the train slid into a monster station, that looked uncommonly like a cave, and stopped. It was huge, about three hundred feet deep and almost spherical. The tracks ran to the exact center without trusses, and the platform at its side likewise rested comfortably upon air.
The conductor was the only person left in the car, the rest having mostly gotten off at Hosannah Square. He hung limply from the porcelain hand-grip, staring fixedly at a lip-stick advertisement. The door of the motorman's cabin opened and the little man came out. He glanced at Cullen, turned away, then whirled back.
'Hey,' he said, 'who are you?'
Cullen rotated slowly, still clutching the hand-grip. 'Only the conductor. Don't mind me. I'm quitting anyway. I don't like the work.'
'Oh dear, dear, this is unexpected.' The little man waggled his head and tch-tched. 'I'm Mr. Crumley,' he explained. 'I steal things. People mostly. Sometimes subway cars, - but they're such big, clumsy things, don't you think?'
'Mister,' groaned Cullen. 'I quit thinking two hours ago. It didn't get me anywhere. Who are you, anyway?'
'I told you - I'm Mr. Crumley. I'm practicing to be a god.'
'A gob?' said Cullen. 'You mean a sailor?'
'Dear, no,' frowned Mr. Crumley. 'I said, "god," as in Jehovah. Look!' He pointed out the window to the wall of the cave. Where his finger pointed, the rock billowed and rose. He moved his finger and there was a near ridge of rock describing a reversed, lower case 'h.'
That's my symbol,' said Crumley modestly. 'Mystic, isn't it? But that's nothing. Wait till I really get things organized. Dear, dear, will I give them miracles!'
Cullen's head swivelled between the raised-rock symbol and the simpering Mr. Crumley, until he began to get dizzy, and then he stopped.
'Listen,' he demanded hoarsely. 'How did you get that car out of Flatbush Avenue? Where did that tunnel come from? Are some of them foreigners -'
'Oh, my, no!' answered Mr. Crumley. 'I made that myself and willed it so that no one would notice. It was quite difficult. It just wears the ectoplasm right out of me. Miracles with people mixed up in it are much harder than the other kind, because you have to fight their wills. Unless you have lots of Believers, you can't do it.- Now that I've got over a hundred thousand, I can do it, but there was a time,' he shook his head reminiscently, 'when I couldn't even have levitated a baby - or healed a leper. Oh, well, we're wasting time. We ought to be at the nearest factory.'
Cullen brightened. 'Factory' was more prosaic. 'I once had a brother,' he said, 'who worked in a sweater factory, but-'
'Oh, goodness, Mr. Cullen. I'm referring to my Believers' Factories. I have to educate people to believe in me; don't I, and preaching is such slow work. I believe in mass production. Some day I intend to be called the Henry Ford of Utopia, Why, I've got twelve Factories in Brooklyn alone and when I manufacture enough Believers, I'll just cover the world with them.'
He sighed, 'Gracious me, if I only had enough Believers. I've got to have a million before I can let things progress by themselves and until then I have to attend to every detail myself. It is so boring! I even have to keep reminding my Believers who I am - even the Disciples. Incidentally, Cullen, - I read your mind, by the way, so that's how I know your name -you want to be a Believer, of course.'
'Well, now,' said Cullen nervously.
'Oh, come now. Some gods would have been angry at your intrusion and done away with you,' he snapped his fingers, 'like that. Not I, though, because I think killing people is messy and inconsiderate. Just the same, you'll have to be a Believer.'
Now Patrick Cullen was an intelligent Irishman. That is to say, he admitted the existence of banshees, leprechauns and the Little Folk, and kept an open mind on poltergeists, werewolves, vampires and such-like foreign trash. At mere super-naturalities, he was too well-educated to sneer. Still, Cullen did not intend to compromise his religion. His theology was weak, but for a mortal to claim godship smacked of heresy, not to say sacrilege and blasphemy, even to him.
'You're a faker,' he cried boldly, 'and you're headed straight for Hell the way you're going.'
Mr. Crumley clicked his tongue, 'What terrible language you use. And so unnecessary! Of course you Believe in me.'
'Oh, yeah?'
'Well, then, if you are stubborn, I'll pass a minor miracle. It's inconvenient, but now,' he made vague motions with his left hand, 'you Believe in me.'
'Certainly,' said Cullen, hurt. 'I always did. How do I go about worshipping you? I want to do this properly.'
'Just Believe in me, and that's enough. Now you must go to the factories and then we'll send you back home - they'll never know you were gone - and you can live your life like a Believer.'
The conductor smiled ecstatically, 'Oh, happy life! I want to go to the factories.'
'Of course you would,' replied Mr. Crumley. 'You'd be a fine Crumleyite otherwise, wouldn't you? Come!' He pointed at the door of the car, and the door slid open. They walked out and Crumley kept on pointing. Rock faded away in front, and bit down again behind. Through the wall Cullen walked, following that little figure who was his god.
That was a god, thought Cullen. Any god that could do that was one hell of a damn good god to believe in.
And then he was at the factory - in another cave, only smaller. Mr. Crumley seemed to like caves.
Cullen didn't pay much attention to his surroundings. He couldn't see much anyway on account of the faint violet mist that blurred his vision. He got the impression of a slowly-moving conveyor belt, with men stationed at intervals along it. Disciples, he thought. And the parts being machined on that belt were probably non-Believers, or such low trash.
There was a man watching him, smiling. A Disciple, Cullen thought, and quite naturally made the sign to him. He had never made it before, but it was easy. The Disciple replied in kind.
'He told me you were coming,' said the Disciple. 'He made a special miracle for you, he said. That's quite a distinction. Do you want me to show you around the belt?'
'You bet.'
'Well, this is Factory One. It's the nerve center of all the factories of the country. The others give preliminary treatment only; and make only Believers. We make Disciples.'
Oh, boy, Disciples! 'Am I going to be a Disciple?' asked Cullen eagerly.
'After being miraculated by him. Of course! You're a somebody, you know. There are only five other people he ever took personal charge of.'
This was a glorious way to do things. Everything Mr. Crumley did was glorious. What a god! What a god!
'You started that way, too.'
'Certainly,' said the Disciple, placidly, 'I'm an important fellow, too. Only I wish I were more important, even.'
'What for?' said Cullen, in a shocked tone of voice. 'Are you murmuring against the dictates of Mr. Crumley? (may he prosper). This is sacrilege.'
The Disciple shifted uncomfortably, 'Well, I've got ideas, and I'd like to try them out.'
.'You've got ideas, huh?' muttered Cullen balefully. 'Does Mr. Crumley (may he live forever) know?'
'Well - frankly, no! But just the same,' the Disciple looked over each shoulder carefully and drew closer, 'I'm not the only one. There are lots of us that think Mr. Crumley (on whom be blessings) is just a trifle old-fashioned. For instance, take the lights in this place.'
Cullen stared upwards. The lights were the same type as those in the terminal-cave. They might have been stolen from any line of the IRT subway. Perfect copies of the stop-and-go signals and the exit markers.
'What's wrong?' he asked.
The Disciple sneered, They lack originality. You'd think a grade A god would do something new. When he takes people, he does it through the subway, and he obeys subway rules. He waits for the Dispatcher to tell him to go; he stops at every station; he uses crude electricity and so on. What we need,' the Disciple was waving his hands wildly and shouting, 'is more enterprise, more git-and-go. We've got to speed up things and run them with efficiency and vim.'
Cullen stared hotly, 'You are a heretic,' he accused. 'You are doomed to damnation.' He looked angrily about for a bell, whistle, gong or drum wherewith to summon the great Crumley, but found nothing.
The other blinked in quick thought. 'Say,' he said, bluffly, 'look at what time it is. I'm behind schedule. You better get on the belt for your first treatment.'
Cullen was hot about the slovenly assistance. Mr. Crumley was getting from this inferior Disciple, but a treatment is a treatment, so making the sign devoutly, he got on. He found it fairly comfortable despite its jerky motion. The Disciple motioned to Cullen's first preceptor - another Disciple - standing beside a sort of blackboard. Cullen had watched others while discussing Crumley and he had noticed the question and answer procedure that had taken place. He had noticed it particularly.
Consequently, he was surprised, when the second Disciple, instead of using his heavy pointer to indicate a question on the board, reversed it and brought it down upon his head.
The lights went out!
When he came to, he was under the belt, at the very bottom of the cave. He was tied up, and the Rebellious Disciple and three others were talking about him.
'He couldn't be persuaded,' the Disciple was saying. 'Crumley must have given him a double treatment or something.'
'It's the last double treatment Crumley'll ever give,' said the fat little man.
'Let's hope so. How's it coming?'
'Very well. Very well, indeed. We teleported ourselves to Section Four about two hours ago. It was a perfect miracle.'
The Disciple was pleased. Tine! How're they doing at Four?'
The fat little man clucked his lips. 'Well, now, not so hot. For some reason, they're getting odd effects over there. Miracles are just happening. Even ordinary Crumleyites can pass them, and sometimes they - just happen. It's extremely annoying.'
'Hmm, that's bad. If there are too many hitches, Crumley'll get suspicious. If he investigates there first, he can reconvert all of them in a jiffy, before he comes here and then without their support we might not be strong enough to stand up against him.'
'Say, now,' said the fat man apprehensively, 'we're not strong enough now, you know. None of this going off half-cocked.'
'We're strong enough,' pointed out the Disciple stiffly, 'to weaken him long enough to get us a new god started, and after that-'
'A new god, eh?' said another. He nodded wisely.
'Sure,' said the Disciple. 'A new god, created by us, can be destroyed by us. He'd be completely under our thumb and then instead of this one-man tyranny, we can have a sort of - er -council.'
There were general grins and everyone looked pleased.
'But we'll discuss that further some other time,' continued the Disciple briskly. 'Let's Believe just a bit. Crumley isn't stupid, you know, and we don't want him to observe any slackening. Come on, now. All together.'
They closed their eyes, concentrated a bit, and then opened them with a sigh.
'Well,' said the little, fat man, 'that's over. I'd better be getting back now.'
From under the belt, Cullen watched him. He looked singularly like a chicken about to take off for a tree as he flexed his knees and stared upwards. Then he added to the resemblance not a little when he spread his arms, gave a little hop and fluttered away.
Gullen could follow his flight only by watching the eyes of the three remaining. Those eyes turned up and up, following the fat man to the very top of the cave, it seemed. There was an air of self-satisfaction about those eyes. They were very happy over their miracles.
Then they all went away and left Cullen to his holy indignation. He was shocked to the very core of his being at this sinful rebellion, this apostasy - this - this - There weren't any words for it, even when he tried Gaelic.
Imagine trying to create a god that would' be under the thumbs of the creators. It was anthropomorphic heresy (where had he heard that word, now?) and struck at the roots of all religion. Was he going to lie there and watch anything strike at the roots of all religion? Was he going to submit to having Mr. Crumley (may he swim through seas of ecstasy) deposed?
Never!
But the ropes thought otherwise, so there he stayed.
And then there was an interruption in his thoughts. There came a low, booming sound - a sound which would have been a voice if it had not been pitched so incredibly low. There was a menace to it that got immediate attention. It got attention from Cullen, who quivered in his bonds; from the others in the cave, who quivered even harder, not being restrained by ropes; from the belt itself, which stopped dead with a jerk, and quivered mightily.
The Rebellious Disciple dropped to his knees and quivered more than any of them.
The voice came again, this time in a recognizable language, 'WHERE IS THAT BUM, CRUMLEY?'it roared.
There was no wait for an answer. A cloud of shadow gathered in the center of the hall and spat a black bolt at the belt. A spot of fire leaped out from where the bolt had touched and spread slowly outward. Where it passed, the belt ceased to exit. It v/as far from Cullen, but there were humans nearer, and among those scurrying pandemonium existed.
Cullen wanted very much to join the flight, but unfortunately the Disciple who had trussed him up had evidently been a Boy Scout. Jerking, twisting and writhing had no effect upon the stubborn ropes, so he fell back upon Gaelic and wishing. He wished he were free. He wished he weren't tied. He wished he were far away from that devouring flame. He wished lots of things, some unprintable, but mainly those.
And with that he felt a gentle slipping pressure and down at his feet was an untidy pile of hempen fibre. Evidently the forces liberated by the rebellion were getting out of control here as well as in Section Four. What had the little fat man said? 'Miracles are just happening. Even ordinary Crumleyites can pass them, and sometimes they - just happen.'
But why waste time? He ran to the rock wall and howled a wish at it to dissolve into nothing. He howled several times, with Gaelic modifications, but the wall didn't even slightly soften. He stared wildly and then saw the hole. It was on the side of the cave, diametrically across from Cullen's position at the bottom of the hall, and about three loops of the belt up. The upward spiral passed just below it.
Somehow he made the leap that grabbed the lower lip of the spiral, wriggled his way onto it and jumped into a run. The fire of disintegration was behind him and plenty far away, but it was making time. Up the belt to the third loop he ran, not taking time to be dizzy from the circular trip. But when he got there, the hole, large, black and inviting, was just the tiniest bit higher than he could jump.
He leaned against the wall panting. The spot of fire was now two spots, crawling both ways from a twenty foot break in the belt. Everyone in the cavern, some two hundred people, was in motion, and everyone made some sort of noise.
Somehow, the sight stimulated him. It nerved him to further efforts to get into the hole. Wildly, he tried walking up the sheer wall, but this didn't work.
And then Mr. Crumley stuck his head out of the hole and said, 'Oh, mercy me, what a perfectly terrible mess. Dear, dear! Come up here, Cullen! Why do you stay down there!'
A great peace descended upon Cullen. 'Hail, Mr. Crumley.' he cried. 'May you sniff the essence of roses forever.'
Mr. Crumley looked pleased, 'Thank you, Cullen.' He waved his hand, and the conductor was beside him - a simple matter of levitation. Once again,.Cullen decided in his inmost soul that here was a god.
'And now,' said Mr. Crumley, 'we must hurry, hurry, hurry. I've lost most of my power when the Disciples rebelled, and my subway car is stuck half-way. I'll need your help. Hurry!'
Cullen had no time to admire the tiny subway at the end of the tunnel. He jumped off the platform on Crumley's heels and dashed about a hundred feet down the tube to where the car was standing idle. He wafted into the open front door with the grace of a chorus-boy. Mr. Crumley took care of that.
'Cullen,' said Mr. Crumley, 'start this thing and take it back to the regular line. And be careful; he is waiting for me.'
'Who?'
'He, the new god. Imagine those fools - no, idiots - thinking they could create a controllable god, when the very essence of godship is uncontrollability. Of course, when they made a god to destroy me, they made a Destroyer, and he'll just destroy everything in sight that I created, including my Disciples.'
Cullen worked quickly. He knew how to start car 30990; any conductor would. He raced to the other end of the car for the control lever, snatched it off, and returned at top speed. That was all he needed. There was power in the rail; the lights were on; and there were no stop signals between him and God's Country.
Mr. Crumley lay himself down on a seat, 'Be very quiet. He may let you get past him. I'm going to blank myself out, and maybe he won't notice me. At any rate, he won't harm you - I hope. Dear, dear, since this all started in section four, things are such a mess.'
Eight stations passed before anything happened and then came Utopia Circle station and - well, nothing really happened. It was just an impression - an impression of people all around him for a few seconds watching him closely with a virulent hostility. It wasn't exactly people, but a person. It wasn't exactly a person either, but just a huge eye, watching -Watching - watching.
But it passed, and almost immediately Cullen saw a black and white ' Flatbush Avenue ' sign at the side of the tunnel. He jammed on his brakes in a hurry, for there was a train -waiting there. But the controls didn't work the way they should have, and the car edged up until it was in contact with the cars before. With a soft click, it coupled and 30990 was just the last car of the train.
It was Mr. Crumley's work, of course. Mr. Crumley stood behind him, watching. 'He didn't get you, did he? No - I see he didn't.'
'Is there any more danger?' asked Cullen, anxiously.
'I don't think so,' responded Mr. Crumley sadly. 'After he has destroyed all my creation, there will be nothing left for him to destroy, and, deprived of a function, he will simply cease to exist. That's the result of this nasty, slipshod work.
I'm disgusted with human beings.'
'Don't say that,' said Cullen.
'I will,' retorted Mr. Crumley savagely, 'Human beings aren't fit to be god of. They're too much trouble and worry. It would give any self-respecting god gray hairs and I suppose you think a god looks very dignified all gray. Darn all humans! They can get along without me. From now on, I'm going to go to Africa and try the chimpanzees. I'll bet they make much better material.'
'But wait,' wailed Cullen. 'What about me? I believe in you.'
'Oh, dear, that would never do. Here! Return to normal.'
Mr. Crumley's hand caressed the air, and Cullen, once more a God-fearing Irishman, let loose a roar in the purest Gaelic and made for him.
'Why, you blaspheming spalpeen -'
But there was no Mr. Crumley. There was only the Dispatcher, asking very impolitely - in English - what the blank-ety-blank hell was the matter with him.



***



I am sorry to say that I have no clear memory, at this time, what parts of the story are mine and what parts are Pohl's. Going over it, I can say, 'This part sounds like me, this part doesn't,' but whether I'd be right or not I couldn't swear,
Fantasy Book was a very borderline publication that lasted only eight issues. 'The Little Man on the Subway' was in the sixth.
An amusing fact about this issue of a small magazine that had to make do with what it could find among the rejects of the field was that it included 'Scanners Live in Vain,' by Cord-wainer Smith. Thia was Smith's first published story and he was not to publish another for eight years or so. In the 1960s, Smith (a pseudonym for a man whose real identity was not made clear until after his death) became a writer of considerable importance, and this first story of his became a classic.
While working on 'The Little Man on the Subway' I was also doing another 'positronic robot' story, called 'Liar!' In this one, my character Susan Calvin first appeared (she has been a character in ten of my stories up to the present time and I don't eliminate the possibility that she will appear yet again).
It was while Campbell and I were discussing this story, by the way, on December 16, 1940, that the 'Three Laws of Robotics' were worked out in full. (I say it was Campbell who worked them out and he says it was I - but I know I'm right. It was he.)
'Liar!' was accepted at once by Campbell, at the end of January, without revision, and appeared in the May 1941 issue of Astounding. It was my fourth appearance in that magazine. The fact that it appeared the month after 'Reason' helped fix the 'positronic robot' stories in the readers' minds^as a 'series.' 'Liar!' eventually appeared in /, Robot.
The sale of two 'positronic robot' stories, 'Reason' and 'Liar!' virtually back to back put me all on fire to do more of the same. When I suggested still another story of the sort to Campbell on February 3, 1941, he approved, but he said he didn't want me, this early in the game, tying myself down too completely into a rigid formula. He suggested I do other kinds of stories first. I was a good boy; I obeyed.
On that very day, in fact, I decided to try fantasy again. I wrote a short one (1,500 words) called 'Masks,' and heaven only knows what it was about, for I don't. I submitted it to Campbell for Unknown on February 10, and he rejected it. It is gone; it no longer exists.
Later that month I also wrote a short story called 'The Hazing,' intended for Pohl. I submitted it to him on February 24, and he rejected it at once. Eventually I submitted it to Thrilling Wonder Stories. They requested a revision, I obliged, and they accepted it on July 29, 1941.







The Hazing [8]


The campus of Arcturus University, on Arcturus's second planet, Eron, is a dull place during mid-year vacations and, moreover, a hot one, so that Myron Tubal, sophomore, found life boring and uncomfortable. For the fifth time that day, he looked in at the Undergraduate Lounge in a desperate attempt at locating an acquaintance, and was at last gratified to behold Bill Sefan, a green-skinned youngster from Vega's fifth planet.
Sefan, like Tubal, had flunked Biosociology and was staying through vacation to study for a make-up exam. Things like that weave strong bonds between sophomore and sophomore.
Tubal grunted a greeting, dropped his huge hairless body -he was a native of the Arcturian System itself - into the largest chair and said:
'Have you seen the new freshmen yet?'
'Already! It's six weeks before the fall semester starts!'
Tubal yawned. 'These are a special breed of frosh. They're the very first batch from the Solarian System - ten of them.'
'Solarian System? You mean that new system that joined the Galactic Federation three-four years ago?'
That's the one. Their world capital is called Earth, I think.'
'Well, what about them?'
'Nothing much. They're just here, that's all. Some of them have hair on the upper lip, and very silly it looks, too. Otherwise, they look like any of a dozen or so other breeds of Humanoids.'
It was at this point that the door flew open and little Wri Forase ran in. He was from Deneb's single planet, and the short, gray fuzz that covered his head and face bristled with agitation, while his large purple eyes gleamed excitedly.
'Say,' he twittered breathlessly, 'have you seen the Earth-men?'
Sefan sighed. 'Isn't anyone ever going to change the subject? Tubal was just telling me about them.'
'He was?' Forase seemed disappointed. 'But - but did he tell you these were that abnormal race they made such a fuss over when the Solarian System entered the Federation?'
'They looked all right to me,' said Tubal.
'I'm not talking about them from the physical standpoint,' said the Denebian disgustedly. 'It's the mental aspect of the case. Psychology! That's the stuff!' Forase was going to be a psychologist some day. 'Oh, that! Well, what's wrong with them?'
'Their mob psychology as a race is all wrong,' babbled Forase. 'Instead of becoming less emotional with numbers, as is the case with every other type of Humanoid known, they become more emotional! In groups, these Earthmen riot, panic, go crazy. The more there are, the worse it is. So help me, we even invented a new mathematical notation to handle the problem. Look!'
He had his pocket-pad and stylus out in one rapid motion; but Tubal's hand clamped down upon them before the stylus so much as made a mark.
Tubal said, 'Whoa! I've got a walloping lulu of an idea.'
'Imagine!' murmured Sefan.
Tubal ignored him. He smiled again, and his hand rubbed thoughtfully over his bald dome.
'Listen,' he said, with sudden briskness. His voice dropped to a conspiratorial whisper.
Albert Williams, late of Earth, stirred in his sleep and became conscious of a prodding finger exploring the space between his second and third ribs. He opened his eyes, swiveled his head, stared stupidly; then gasped, shot upright and reached for the light switch.
'Don't move,' said the shadowy figure beside his bed. There was a muted click, and the Earthman found himself centered in the pearly beam of a pocket flash.
He blinked and said, 'Who the blasted devil are you?' 'You are going to get out of bed,' replied the apparition stolidly. 'Dress, and come with me.' Williams grinned savagely. 'Try and make me.' There was no answer, but the flash beam shifted slightly and fell upon the shadow's other hand. It held a 'neuronic whip,' that pleasant little weapon that paralyzes the vocal chords and twists nerves into so many knots of agony. Williams swallowed hard, and got out of bed.
He dressed in silence, and then said:
'All right, what do I do now?'
The gleaming 'whip' gestured, and the Earthrnan moved toward the door.
'Just walk ahead,' said the unknown.
Williams moved out of the room, along the silent corridor, and down eight stories without daring to look back. Out upon the campus he stopped, and felt metal probe the small of his back.
'Do you know where Obel Hall is?'
Williams, nodding, began walking. He walked past Obel Hall, turned right at University Avenue, and after half a mile stepped off the roads and past the trees. A spaceship hulked dimly in the darkness, with ports closely curtained and only a dim light showing where the airlock opened a crack.
'Get in!' He was shoved up a flight of stairs and into a small room.
He blinked, looked about him and counted aloud.
'-seven, eight, nine, and I make ten. They've got us all, I guess.'
'It's no guess,' growled Eric Chamberlain sourly. 'It's a certainty.' He was rubbing his hand. 'I've been here an hour.'
'What's wrong with the mitt?' asked Williams.
'I sprained it on the jaw of the rat that brought me here. He's as tough as a spaceship's hull.'
Williams seated himself cross-legged upon the floor and rested his head against the wall.
'Has anyone any idea as to what this is all about?'
'Kidnapping!' said little Joey Sweeney. His teeth were chattering.
'What the devil for?' snorted Chamberlain. 'If any of us are milionaires, I hadn't heard of it. I know I'm not!'
Williams said, 'Look, let's not go off the deep end. Kidnaping or anything of that sort is out. These people can't be criminals. It stands to reason that a civilization that has developed psychology to the extent this Galactic Federation has, would be able to wipe out crime without raising a sweat.'
'Pirates,' grunted Lawrence Marsh. 'I don't think so, but it's just a suggestion.'
'Nuts!' said Williams. 'Piracy is a frontier phenomenon. This region of space has been civilized for tens of millennia.'
'Just the same, they had guns,' insisted Joe, 'and I don't like it.' He had left his glasses in his room and peered about in nearsighted anxiety.
'That doesn't mean much,' answered Williams. 'Now, I've been thinking. Here we are - ten newly arrived freshmen at Arcturus U. On our first night here, we're bundled mysteriously out of our rooms and into a strange spaceship. That suggests something to me. How about it?'
Sidney Morton raised his head from his arms long enough to say sleepily:
'I've thought of it, too. It looks like we're in for one hell of a hazing. Gents, I think the local sophs are just having good, clean fun.'
'Exactly,' agreed Williams. 'Anyone have any other ideas?'
Silence. 'All right, then, so there isn't anything to do but wait. Personally, I'm going to catch up on my sleep. They can wake me up if they need me.'
There was a jar at that moment and he fell off balance.
'Well, we're off - wherever we're going.'
Moments later, Bill Sefan hesitated just an instant before entering the control room. When he finally did, it was to face a highly excited Wri Forase.
'How is it working?' demanded the Denebian.
'Rotten,' responded Sefan sourly. 'If they're panicked, then I'm damned. They're going to sleep.'
'Asleep! All of them? But what were they saying?'
'How do I know? They weren't speaking Galactic, and I can't make head or tail out of their infernal foreign gibberish.'
Forase threw his hands into the air in disgust.
Tubal spoke finally. 'Listen, Forase, I'm cutting a class in Biosoc. - which I can't afford. You guaranteed the psychology of this stunt. If it turns out to be a flop, I'm not going to like it'
'Well, for the love of Deneb,' grated Forase desperately, 'you two are a fine pair of yellow-bellies! Did you expect them to start screaming and kicking right off? Sizzling Arcturus! Wait till we get to the Spican System, will you? When we maroon them overnight-'
He tittered suddenly. 'This is going to be the fanciest trick since they tied those stink-bats to the chromatic organ on Concert Night.'
Tubal cracked a grin, but Sefan leaned back in his chair and remarked thoughtfully.
'What if someone - say, President Wynn - hears about this?'
The Arcturian at the controls shrugged. 'It's only a hazing. They'll go easy.'
'Don't play dumb, M. T. This isn't kid stuff, Planet Four, Spica - the whole Spican System, in fact - is banned to Galactic ships, and you know that. It's got a sub-Humanoid race on it. They're supposed to develop entirely free of interference until they discover interstellar travel on their own. That's the law, and they're strict about it. Space! If they find out about this, we'll be in the soup for fair.'
Tubal turned in his seat. 'How in Arcturus do you expect Prexy Wynn - damn his thick hide! - to find out about us? Now, mind you, I'm not saying the story won't spread around the campus, because half the fun will be killed if we have to keep it to ourselves. But how will names come out? No one will squeal. You know that.'
'Okay,' said Sefan, and shrugged.
And then Tubal said, 'Ready for hyper-space!'
He compressed keys and there was the queer internal wrench that marked the ship's departure from normal space.
The ten Earthmen were rather the worse for wear, and looked it. Lawrence Marsh squinted at his watch again.
Two-thirty,' he said. 'That's thirty-six hours now. I wish they'd get this over with.'
'This isn't a hazing,' moaned Sweeney. 'It takes too long.'
Williams grew red. 'What do you all look half-dead about? They've been feeding us regularly, haven't they? They haven't tied us up, have they? I should say it was pretty evident that they were taking good care of us.'
'Or,' came Sidney Morton's discontented drawl, 'fattening us up for the slaughter.'
He paused, and everyone stiffened. There was no mistaking the queer internal wrench they had felt.
'Get that!' said Eric Chamberlain in sudden frenzy. 'We're back in normal space again, and that means we're only an hour or two from wherever we're going. We've got to do something!'
'Hear, hear,' Williams snorted. 'But what?'
'There are ten of us, aren't there?' shouted Chamberlain, puffing out his chest. 'Well, I've only seen one of them so far. Next time he comes in, and we've got another meal due us pretty soon, we're going to mob him.'
Sweeney looked sick. 'What about the neuronic whip he always carries?'
'It won't kill us. He can't get us all before we pin him down, anyway.'
'Eric,' said Williams bluntly, 'you're a fool.'
Chamberlain flushed and his stub-fingered fists closed slowly.
'I'm just in the mood for a little practice persuasion. Call me that again, will you?'
'Sit down!' Williams scarcely bothered to look up. 'And don't work so hard justifying my epithet. All of us are nervous and keyed-up, but that doesn't mean we ought to go altogether crazy. Not yet, anyway. First of all, even discounting the whip, mobbing our jailer won't be particularly successful.
'We've only seen one, but that one is from the Arcturian System. He's better than seven feet tall, and comfortably past the three-hundred-pound mark. He'd mop us up - all ten of us - with his bare fists. I thought you had one run-in with him already, Eric.'
There was a thickish silence.
Williams added, 'And even if we could knock him out and finish as many others as there may be in the ship, we still haven't the slightest idea where we are or how to get back or even how to run the ship.' A pause. Then, 'Well?'
'Nuts!' Chamberlain turned away, and glowered in silence.
The door kicked open and the giant Acturian entered. With one hand, he emptied the bag he carried, and with the other kept his neuronic whip carefully leveled.
'Last meal,' he grunted.
There was a general scramble for the rolling cans, still lukewarm from recent heating. Morton glared at his with disgust.
'Say,' he spoke stumblingly in Galactic, 'can't you give us a change? I'm tired of this rotten goulash of yours. This is the fourth can!'
'So what? It's your last meal,' the Arcturian snapped, and left.
A horrified paralysis prevailed.
'What did he mean by that?' gulped someone huskily.
'They're going to kill us!' Sweeney was round-eyed, the thin edge of panic in his voice.
Williams' mouth was dry and he felt unreasoning anger grow against Sweeney's contagious fright. He paused - the kid was only seventeen - and said huskily, 'Stow it, will you? Let's eat.'
It was two hours later that he felt the shuddering jar that meant the landing and end of.the journey. In that time, no one had spoken, but Williams could feel the pall of fear choke tighter with the minutes.
Spica had dipped crimsonly below the horizon and there was a chill wind blowing. The ten Earthmen, huddled together miserably upon the rock-strewn hilltop, watched their captors sullenly. It was the huge Arcturian, Myron Tubal, that did the talking, while the green-skinned Vegan, Bill Sefan, and the fuzzy little Denebian, Wri Forase, remained placidly in the background.
'You've got your fire,' said the Arcturian gruffly, 'and there's plenty of wood about to keep it going. That will keep the beasts away. We'll leave you a pair of whips before we go, and those will do as protection, if any of the aborigines of the planet bother you. You will have to use your own wits as far as food, water and shelter are concerned.'
He turned away. Chamberlain let loose with a sudden roar, and leaped after the departing Arcturian. He was sent reeling back with an effortless heave of the other's arm.
The lock closed after the three other-world men. Almost at once, the ship lifted off the ground and shot upward. Williams finally broke the chilled silence.
They've left the whips. I'll take one and you can have the other, Eric.'
One by one, the Earthmen dropped into a sitting position, back to the fire, frightened, half panicky.
Williams forced a grin. 'There's plenty of game about - the region is well-wooded. Come on, now, there are ten of us and they've got to come back sometime. Let's show them we Earthmen can take it. How about it, fellows?'
He was talking aimlessly now. Morton said listlessly.
'Why don't you shut up? You're not making this any easier.'
Williams gave up. The pit of his own stomach was turning cold.
The twilight blackened into night, and the circle of light about the fire contracted into a little flickering area that ended in shadows. Marsh gasped suddenly, and his eyes went wide.
'There's some - something coming!'
The stir that followed froze itself into attitudes of breathless attention.
'You're crazy,' began Williams huskily - and stopped dead at the unmistakable, slithering sound that reached his ears.
'Grab your whip!' he screamed to Chamberlain.
Joey Sweeney laughed suddenly - a strained, high-pitched laugh.
And then - there was a sudden shrieking in the air, and the shades charged down upon them.
Things were happening elsewhere, too.
Tubal's ship lazed outward from Spica's fourth planet, with Bill Sefan at the controls. Tubal himself was in his own cramped quarters, polishing off a huge flagon of Denebian liquor in two gulps.
Wri Forase watched the operation sadly.
'It cost twenty credits a bottle,' he said, 'and I only have a few left.'
'Well, don't let me hog it,' said Tubal magnanimously, 'match me bottle for bottle. It's all right with me.'
'One swig like that,' grumbled the Denebian, 'and I'd be out till the Fall exams.'
Tubal paid scant attention. 'This,' he began, 'is going to make campus history as the hazing stunt -'
And at this point, there was a sharp, singing pinging ping-g-g-g, scarcely muffled by intervening walls, and the lights went out.
Wri Forase felt himself pressed hard against the wall. He struggled for breath and stuttered out in gasps.
'B-by Space, we're at f-full acceleration! What's wr-rong with the equalizer?'
'Damn the equalizer!' roared Tubal, heaving to his feet. 'What's wrong with the ship?'
He stumbled out the door, into the equally dark corridor, with Forase crawling after him. When they burst into the control room, they found Sefan surrounded by the dim emergency lights, his green skin shining with perspiration.
'Meteor,' he croaked. 'It played hob with our power distributors. It's all going into acceleration. The lights, heating units and radio are all out of commission, while the ventilators are just barely limping.' He added, 'And Section Four is punctured.'
Tubal gazed about him wildly. 'Idiot! Why didn't you keep your eye on the mass indicator?'
'I did, you overgrown lump of putty,' howled Sefan, 'but it never registered! It - never - registered! Isn't that just what you'd expect from a second-hand jalopy, rented for two hundred credits? It went through the screen as if it were empty ether.'
'Shut up!' Tubal flung open the suit-compartments and groaned. 'They're all Arcturian models. I should have checked up. Can you handle one of these, Sefan?'
'Maybe.' The Vegan scratched a doubtful ear.
In five minutes, Tubal swung into the lock and Sefan, stumbling awkwardly, followed after. It was half an hour before they returned.
Tubal removed his head-piece. 'Curtains!'
Wri Forase gasped. 'You mean - we're through?'
The Arcturian shook his head. 'We can fix it, but it will take time. The radio is ruined for good, so we can't get help.'
'Get help!' Forase looked shocked. 'That's all we need. How would we explain being inside the Spican system? We might as well commit suicide as send out radio calls. As long as we can get back without help, we're safe. Missing a few more classes won't hurt us too much.'
Sefan's voice broke in dully. 'But what about those panicky Earthmen back on Spica Four?'
Forase's mouth opened, but he didn't say a word. It closed again, and if ever a Humanoid looked sick, Forase was that Humanoid.
That was only the beginning.
It took a day and a half to unscramble the space jalopy's power lines. It took two more days to decelerate to safe turning point. It took four days to return to Spica IV. Total - eight days.
When the ship hovered once more over the place where they had marooned the Earthmen, it was midmorning, and the Tubal's face as he surveyed the area through the televisor was a study in length. Shortly he broke a silence that had long since become sticky.
'I guess we've made every boner we could possibly have made. We landed them right outside a native village. There's no sign of the Earthmen.'
Sefan shook his head dolefully. 'This is a bad business.'
Tubal buried his head in his long arms clear down to the elbows.
'That's the finish. If they didn't scare themselves to death, the natives got them. Violating prohibited solar systems is bad enough - but it's just plain murder now, I guess.'
'What we've got to do,' said Sefan, 'is to get down there and find out if there are any still alive. We owe them that much. After that-'
He swallowed. Forase finished in a whisper.
'After that, it's expulsion from the U., psycho-revision - and manual labor for life.'
'Forget it!' barked Tubal. 'We'll face that when we have to.'
Slowly, very slowly, the ship circled downward and came to rest on the rocky clearing where, eight days previously, ten Earthmen had been left stranded.
'How do we handle these natives?" Tubal turned to Forase with raised eyebrow ridges (there was no hair on them, of course), 'Come on, son, give with some sub-Humanoid psychology. There are only three of us and I don't want any trouble.'
Forase shrugged and his fuzzy face wrinkled in perplexity. 'I've just been thinking about that, Tubal. I don't know any.'
'What!' exploded Sefan and Tubal in twin shouts.
'No one does,' added the Denebian hurriedly. 'It's a fact. After all, we don't let sub-Humanoids into the Federation till they're fully civilized, and we quarantine them until then. Do you suppose we have much opportunity to study their psychology?'
The Arcturian seated himself heavily. 'This gets better and better. Think, Fuzzy-face, will you? Suggest something!'
Forase scratched his head. 'Well - uh - the best we can do is to treat them like normal Humanoids. If we approach slowly, palms spread out, make no sudden movements and keep calm, we ought to get along. Now, remember, I'm saying we ought to. I can't be certain about this.'
'Let's go, and damnation with certainty,' urged Sefan impatiently. 'It doesn't matter much, anyway. If I get knocked off here, I don't have to go back home.' His face took on a hunted look. 'When I think of what my family is going to say -'
They emerged from the ship and sniffed the atmosphere of Spica's fourth planet. The sun was at meridian, and loomed overhead like a large orange basketball. Off in the woods, a bird called once in a creaky caw. Utter silence descended.
'Hmph!' said Tubal, arms akimbo.
'It's enough to make you feel sleepy. No signs of life at all. Now, which way is the village?'
There was a three-way dispute about this, but it didn't last long. The Arcturian first, the other two tagging along, they strode down the slope and toward the straggling forest.
A hundred feet inside, the trees came alive, as a wave of natives dropped noiselessly from the overhanging branches. Wri Forase went under at the very first of the avalanche. Bill Sefan stumbled, stood his ground momentarily, then went over backward with a grunt.
Only huge Myron Tubal was left standing. Legs straddled wide, and whooping hoarsely, he laid about right and left. The attacking natives hit him and bounced off like drops of water from a whirling flywheel. Modeling his defense on the principle of the windmill, he backed his way against a tree.
Here he made a mistake. On the lowest branch of that tree squatted a native at once more cautious and more brainy than his fellows. Tubal had already noticed that the natives were equipped with stout, muscular tails, and had made a mental note of the fact. Of all the races in the Galaxy, only one other, Homo Gamma Cepheus, possessed tails. What he didn't notice, however, was that these tails were prehensile.
This he found out almost immediately, for the native in the branch above his head looped his tail downward, flashed it about Tubal's neck and contracted it.
The Arcturian threshed wildly in agony, and the tailed attacker was jerked from his tree. Suspended head-first and whirled about in huge sweeps, the native nevertheless maintained his hold and tightened that tail-grip steadily.
The world blacked out. Tubal was unconscious before he hit the ground.
Tubal came to slowly, unpleasantly aware of the stinging stiffness of his neck. He tried vainly to rub that stiffness, and it took a few seconds to realize that he was tied tightly. The fact startled him into alertness. He became aware, first, that he was lying on his stomach; second, of the horrible din about him; third, of Sefan and Forase bundled up next to him - and last, that he could not break his bonds.
'Hey, Sefan, Forase! Can you hear me?'
It was Sefan that answered joyfully. 'You old Draconian goat! We thought you were out for good.'
'I don't die so easy,' grunted the Arcturian 'Where are we?'
There was a short pause.
'In the native village, I imagine,' Wri Forase said dully. 'Did you ever hear such a noise? The drum hasn't stopped a minute since they dumped us here.'
'Have you see anything of -'
Hands were upon Tubal, and he felt himself whirled about. He was in a sitting posture now and his neck hurt worse than ever. Ramshackle huts of thatch and green logs gleamed in the early afternoon sun. In a circle about them, watching in silence, were dark-skinned, long-tailed natives. There must have been hundreds, all wearing feathered head-dresses and carrying short, wickedly barbed spears.
Their eyes were upon the row of figures that squatted mysteriously in the foreground, and upon these Tubal turned his angry glare. It was plain that they were the leaders of the tribe. Dressed in gaudy, fringed robes of ill-tamed skins, they added further to their barbaric impressiveness by wearing tall wooden masks painted into caricatures of the human face.
With measured steps, the masked horror nearest the Human-oids approached.
'Hello,' it said, and the mask lifted up and off. 'Back so soon?'
For quite a long while, Tubal and Sefan said absolutely nothing, while Wri Forase went into a protracted fit of coughing.
Finally, Tubal drew a long breath. 'You're one of the Earth-men, aren't you?'
'That's right. I'm Al Williams. Just call me Al.'
'They haven't killed you yet?'
Williams smiled happily. 'They haven't killed any of us. Quite the contrary. Gentlemen,' he bowed extravagantly, 'meet the new tribal - er - gods.'
'The new tribal what?' gasped Forase. He was still coughing.
'- er - gods. Sorry, but I don't know the Galactic word for a god.'
'What do you "gods" represent?'
'We're sort of supernatural entities - objects to be worshipped. Don't you get it?'
The Humanoids stared unhappily.
'Yes, indeed,' Williams grinned, 'we're persons of great power.'
'What are you talking about?' exclaimed Tubal indignantly. 'Why should they think you were of great power? You Earth people are below average physically - well below!'
'It's the psychology of the thing,' explained Williams. 'If they see us landing in a large, gleaming vehicle that travels mysteriously through the air, and then takes off in a burst of rocket-flame - they're bound to consider us supernatural. That's elementary barbaric psychology.'
Forase's eyes seemed on the point of dropping out as Williams continued.
'Incidentally, what detained you? We figure it was all a hazing of some sort, and it was, wasn't it?'
'Say,' broke in Sefan, 'I think you're feeding us a lot of bull! If they thought you people were gods, why didn't they think we were? We had the ship, too, and -'
'That,' said Williams, 'is where we started to interfere. We explained - via pictures and sign language - that you people were devils. When you finally came back - and say, were we glad to see that ship coming down - they knew what to do.'
'What,' asked Forase, with a liberal dash of awe in his voice, 'are "devils"?'
Williams sighed. 'Don't you Galaxy people know anything? Tubal moved his aching neck slowly. 'How about letting us up now?' he rumbled. 'I've got a crick in my neck.'
'What's your hurry? After all, you were brought here to be sacrificed in our honor.'
'Sacrificed!'
'Sure. You're to be carved up with knives.'
There was a horror-laden silence. 'Don't give us any of that comet-gas!' Tubal managed to grind out at last. 'We're not Earthmen who get panicky or scared, you know.'
'Oh, we know that! I wouldn't fool you for the world. But simple ordinary savage psychology always goes for a little human sacrifice, and-'
Sefan writhed against his bonds and tried to throw himself in a rage at Forase.
'I thought you said no one knew any sub-Humanoid psychology! Trying to alibi your ignorance, weren't you, you shriveled, fuzz-covered, pop-eyed son of a half-breed Vegan lizard! A fine mess we're in now!'
Forase shrank away. 'Now, wait! Just -'
Williams decided the joke had gone far enough.
'Take it easy,' he soothed. 'Your clever hazing blew up right in your faces - it blew up beautifully - but we're not going to carry it too far. I guess we've had enough fun out of you fellows. Sweeney is with the native chief now, explaining that we're leaving and taking you three with us. Frankly, I'll be glad to get going - Wait a while, Sweeney's calling me.'
When Williams returned two seconds later, his expression was peculiar, having turned a bit greenish. In fact, he got greener by the second.
'It looks,' he gulped throatily, 'as if our counter-haze has blow up in our faces. The native chief insists on the sacrifice!'
Silence brooded, while the three Humanoids thought over the state of affairs. For moments, none of them could say a word.
'I've told Sweeney,' Williams added, glumly, 'to go back and tell the chief, that if the doesn't do as we say, something terrible is going to happen to his tribe. But it's pure bluff and he may not fall for it. Uh, - I'm sorry, fellows. I guess we went too far. If it looks really bad, we'll cut you loose and join in the fight.'
'Cut us loose now,' growled Tubal, his blood running cold. 'Let's get this over with!'
'Wait!' cried Forase frantically. 'Let the Earthmen try some of his psychology. Go ahead, Earthman. Think hard!'
Williams thought until his brain began to hurt.
'You see,' he said weakly, 'we've lost some of our godlike prestige, ever since we were unable to cure the chief's wife. She died yesterday.' He nodded abstractedly to himself. 'What we need is an impressive miracle. Er - have you fellows anything in your pockets?'
He knelt beside them and began searching. Wri Forase had a stylus, a pocket-pad, a thin-toothed comb, some anti-itch powder, a sheaf of credits and a few odds and ends. Sefan had a collection of similar nondescript material.
It was from Tubal's hip pocket that Williams withdrew a small black gunlike object with a huge hand-grip and a short barrel.
'What's this?'
Tubal scowled. 'Is that what I've been sitting on all this while? It's a weld-gun that I used to fix up a meteor puncture in our ship. It's no good; power's almost-gone."
Williams' eyes kindled. His whole body galvanized with excitement.
'That's what you think! You Galaxy men never could see farther than your noses. Why don't you come down to Earth for a spell - and get a new point of view?'
Williams was running toward his fellow conspirators now.
'Sweeney,' he howled, 'you tell that damned monkey-tailed chief that in just about one second, I'm going to get sore and pull the whole sky down over his head. Get tough!'
But the chief did not wait for the message. He gestured defiance and the natives made a united rush. Tubal roared, and his muscles cracked against the bonds. The weld-gun in William's hand flared into life, its feeble power beaming outward.
The nearest native hut went up in sudden flames. Another followed - and another - and the fourth - and then the weld-gun went dead.
But it was enough. Not a native remained standing. All were groveling on their faces, wailing and shrieking for pardon. The chief wailed and shrieked loudest of all.
Tell the chief,' said Williams to Sweeney, 'that that's just a little, insignificant sample of what we're thinking of doing to him!'
To the Humanoids, as he cut the rawhide holding them, he added complacently,
'Just some simple, ordinary savage psychology.'
It was only after they were back in their ship and off in space again that Forase locked up his pride.
'But I thought Earthmen had never developed mathematical psychology! How did you know all that sub-Humanoid stuff? No one in the Galaxy has got that far yet!' 'Well,' Williams grinned, 'we have a certain amount of rule-of-thumb knowledge about the workings of the uncivilized mind. You see - we come from a world where most people, in a manner of speaking, are still uncivilized. So we have to know!'
Forase nodded slowly. 'You screwball Earthmen! At least, this little episode has taught us all one thing.'
'What's that?'
'Never,' said Forase, dipping a second time into Earth slang, 'get tough with a bunch of nuts. They may be nuttier than you think!'



***



In going through my stories while preparing this book, I found 'The Hazing' to be the only published story concerning which I could remember nothing from the title alone. Even as I reread it, nothing clicked. If I had been given the story without my name on it and had been asked to read it and guess the author, I would probably have been stumped. Maybe that means something.
It does seem to me, though, that the story is set against a 'Homo Sol' background.
I had better luck with Fred Pohl with another story, 'Super-Neutron,' which I wrote at the end of the same February in which I did 'Masks' and 'The Hazing.' I submitted it to him on March 3, 1941, and he accepted it on March 5.
By that time, less than three years after my first submission, I was clearly becoming rather impatient with rejections. At least, the news of the acceptance of 'Super-Neutron' is greeted in my diary with an 'It's about time I made a sale - five and a half weeks since the last one.'






Super-Neutron [9]


It was at the seventeenth meeting of the Honorable Society of Ananias that we got the greatest scare of our collective lives and consequently elected Gilbert Hayes to the office of Perpetual President.
The Society is not a large one. Before the election of Hayes there were only four of us: John Sebastian, Simon Murfree, Morris Levin and myself. On the first Sunday of every month we met at luncheon, and on these monthly occasions justified our Society's title by gambling the dinner check on our ability to lie.
It was quite a complicated process, with strict Parliamentary rules. One member spun a yarn each meeting as his turn came up, and two conditions had to be adhered to. His story had to be an outrageous, complicated, fantastic lie; and, it had to sound like the truth. Members were allowed to - and did -attack any and every point of the story by asking questions or demanding explanations.
Woe to the narrator who did not answer all questions immediately, or who, in answering, involved himself in a contradiction. The dinner-check was his! Financial loss was slight; but the disgrace was great.
And then came that seventeenth meeting - and Gilbert Hayes. Hayes was one of several non-members who attended occasionally to listen to the after-dinner whopper, paying his own check, and, of course, being forbidden to participate; but on this occasion he was the only one present aside from the regular members.
Dinner was over, I had been voted into the chair (it was my regular turn to preside), and the minutes had been read, when Hayes leaned forward and said quietly, 'I'd like a chance today, gentlemen.'
I frowned, 'In the eyes of the Society you are non-existent, Mr. Hayes. It is impossible for you to take part.'
'Then just let me make a statement,' he rejoined. The Solar System is coming to an end at exactly seventeen and a half minutes after two this afternoon.'
There was a devil of a stir, and I looked at the electric clock over the television receiver. It was 1.14 p.m.
I said hesitantly, 'If you have anything to substantiate that extraordinary statement, it should be most interesting. It is Mr. Levin's turn today, but if he is willing to waive it, and if the rest of the Society agrees -'
Levin smiled and nodded, and the others joined in.
I banged the gavel, 'Mr. Hayes has the floor.'
Hayes lit his cigar and gazed at it pensively. 'I have little more than an hour, gentlemen, but I'll start at the beginning -which is about fifteen years ago. At that time, though I've resigned since, I was an astrophysicist at Yerkes Observatory - young, but promising. I was hot on the trail of the solution to one of the perennial puzzles of astrophysics - the source of the cosmic rays - and full of ambition.'
He paused, and continued in a different tone, 'You know, it is strange that with all our scientific advance in the last two centuries we have never found either that mysterious source or the equally mysterious reason for the explosion of a star. They are the two eternal puzzles and we know as little about them today as we did in the days of Einstein, Eddington and Milli-kan.
'Still, as I say, I thought I had the cosmic ray by the tail, so I set out to check my ideas by observation, as for that I had to go out in space. It wasn't, however, as easy as all that. It was in 2129, you see, just after the last war, and the Observatory was about broke - as weren't we all?
'I made the best of it. I hired an old second-hand '07 model, piled my apparatus in and set out alone. What's more, I had to sneak out of port without clearance papers, not wishing to go through the red tape the occupation army would have put me through. It was illegal, but I wanted my data - so I headed out at a right angle to the ecliptic, in the direction of the South Celestial Pole, approximately, and left Sol a billion miles behind me.
'The voyage I made, and the data I collected are unimportant. I never reported one or the other. It was the planet I found that makes the story.'
At this point, Murfree raised those bushy eyebrows of his and grunted, 'I would like to warn the gentleman, Mr. Chairman. No member has yet escaped with his skin with the phony planet.'
Hayes smiled grimly, 'I'll take my chance. - To continue; it was on the eighteenth day of my trip that I first detected the planet, and as a little orange disc the size of a pea. Naturally, a planet in that region of space is something of a sensation. I headed for it; and immediately discovered that I had not even scratched the surface of that planet's queerness. To exist there at all was phenomenal - but it likewise possessed absolutely no gravitational field.'
Levin's wine-glass crashed to the floor. 'Mr. Chairman,' he gasped, 'I demand the gentleman's immediate disqualification. No mass can exist without distorting the space in its neighborhood and thus creating a gravitational field. He has made an impossible statement, and should therefore be disqualified.' His face was an angry red.
But Hayes held his hand up, 'I demand time, Mr. Chairman. The explanation will be forthcoming in due course. To make it now would only complicate things. Please, may I continue?'
I considered, 'In view of the nature of your story, I am disposed to be lenient. Delay is granted, but please remember that an explanation will be required eventually. You will lose without it.'
'All right,' said Hayes. 'For the present, you will have to accept my statement that the planet had no gravity at all. That is definite, for I had complete astronomical equipment upon my ship, and though my instruments were very sensitive, they registered a dead zero.
'It worked the other way around as well, for the planet was not affected by the gravity of other masses. Again, I stress the point that it was not affected at all. This I was not able to determine at the time, but subsequent observation over a period of years, showed that the planet was traveling in a straight-line orbit and at a constant speed. As it was well within the sun's influence, the fact that its orbit was neither elliptical nor hyperbolic, and that, though approaching the sun, it was not accelerating, showed definitely that it was independent of solar gravity.'
'Wait a while, Hayes.' Sebastian scowled till his gold premolar gleamed. 'What held this wonderful planet together? Without gravity, why didn't it break up and drift apart?'
'Sheer inertia, for one thing!' was the immediate retort. There was nothing to pull it apart. A collision with another body of comparable size might have done it - leaving out of consideration the possibility of the existence of some other binding force peculiar to the planet.'
He sighed and continued, 'That doesn't finish the properties of the body. Its red-orange color and its low reflective power, or albedo, set me on another track, and I made the astonishing discovery that the planet was entirely transparent to the whole electro-magnetic spectrum from radio waves to cosmic rays. It was only in the region of the red and yellow portion of the visible-light octave that it was reasonably opaque. Hence, its color.'
'Why was this?' demanded Murfree.
Hayes looked at me, 'That is an unreasonable question, Mr. Chairman. I maintain that I might as well be asked to explain why glass is entirely transparent to anything above or below the ultra-violet region, so that heat, light and X-rays pass through, while it remains opaque to ultra-violet light itself. This sort of thing is a property of the substance itself and must be accepted as such without explanation.'
I whacked my gavel, 'Question declared improper!'
'I object,' declared Murfree. 'Hayes missed the point. Nothing is perfectly transparent. Glass of sufficient thickness will stop even cosmic rays. Do you mean to say that blue light would pass through an entire planet, or heat, for instance?'
'Why not?' replied Hayes. 'That perfect transparency does not exist in your experience does not mean it does not exist altogether. There is certainly no scientific law to that effect. This planet was perfectly transparent except for one small region of the spectrum. That's a definite fact of observation.'
My gavel thumped again, 'Explanation declared sufficient. Continue, Hayes.'
His cigar had gone out and he paused to relight. Then, 'In other respects, the planet was normal. It was not quite the size of Saturn - perhaps half way in diameter between it and Neptune. Subsequent experiments showed it to possess mass, though it was hard to find out how much - certainly more than twice Earth's. With mass, it possessed the usual properties of inertia and momentum - but no gravity.'
It was 1.35 now.
Hayes followed my eyes and said, 'Yes, only three-quarters of an hour is left. I'll hurry!Ö Naturally, this queer planet set me to thinking, and that, together with the fact that I had already been evolving certain theories concerning cosmic rays and novae, led to an interesting solution.'
He drew a deep breath, 'Imagine - if you can - our cosmos as a cloud of - well, super-atoms which -'
'I beg your pardon,' exclaimed Sebastian, rising to his feet, 'are you intending to base any of your explanation on drawing analogies between stars and atoms, or between solar systems and electronic orbits?'
'Why do you ask?' questioned Hayes, quietly.
'Because if you do, I demand immediate disqualification. The belief that atoms are miniature solar systems is in a class with the Ptolemaic scheme of the universe. The idea has never been accepted by responsible scientists even at the very dawn of the atomic theory.'
I nodded, 'The gentleman is correct. No such analogy will be permitted as part of the explanation.'
'I object,' said Hayes. 'In your school course in elementary physics or chemistry, you will remember that in the study of the properties of gases, it was often pretended, for the sake of illustrating a point, that the gas molecules were tiny billiard balls. Does that mean that gas molecules are billiard balls?'
'No,' admitted Sebastian.
'It only means,' drove on Hayes, 'that gas molecules act similarly to billiard balls in some ways. Therefore the actions of one are better visualized by studying the actions of the other. - Well, then, I am only trying to point out a phenomenon in our universe of stars, and for the sake of ease of visualization, I compare it to a similar, and better-known, phenomenon in the world of atoms. That does not mean that stars are magnified atoms.'
I was won over. 'The point is well-taken,' I said, 'You may continue with your explanation, but if it is the judgment of the chair that the analogy becomes a false one, you will be disqualified.'
'Good,' agreed Hayes, 'but we'll pass on to another point for a moment. Do any of you remember the first atomic power plants of a hundred and seventy years ago and how they operated?'
'I believe,' muttered Levin, 'that they used the classical uranium fission method for power. They bombarded uranium with slow neutrons and split it up into masurium, barium, gamma rays and more neutrons, thus establishing a cyclic process.'
'That's right! Well, imagine that the stellar universe acted in ways - mind you, this is a metaphor, and not to be taken literally - like a body composed of uranium atoms, and imagine this stellar universe to be bombarded from without by objects which might act in some ways similar to the way neutrons act on an atomic scale.
'Such a super-neutron, hitting a sun, would cause that sun to explode into radiation and more super-neutrons. In other words, you would have a nova.' He looked around for disagreement.
'What justification have you for that idea?' demanded Levin.
'Two; one logical, and one observational. Logic first. Stars are essentially in matter-energy equilibrium, yet suddenly, with no observable change, either spectral or otherwise, they occasionally explode. An explosion indicates instability, but where? Not within the star, for it had been in equilibrium for millions of years. Not from a point within the universe, for novae occur in even concentration throughout the universe. Hence, by elimination, only from a point outside the universe.
'Secondly, observation. I came across one of these super-neutrons!'
Said Murfree indignantly: 'I suppose you mean that gravi-tationless planet you came across?'
'That's right.'
'Then what makes you think it's a super-neutron? You can't use your theory as proof, because you're using the super-neutron itself to bolster the theory. We're not allowed to argue in circles here.'
'I know that,' declared Hayes, stiffly. 'I'll resort to logic again. The world of atoms possesses a cohesive force in the electro-magnetic charge on electrons and protons. The world of stars possesses a cohesive force in gravity. The two forces are only alike in a very general manner. For instance, there are two kinds of electrical charges, positive and. negative, but only one kind of gravity - and innumerable minor differences. Still, an analogy this far seems to me to be permissible. A neutron on an atomic scale is a mass without the atomic cohesive force - electric charge. A super-neutron on a stellar scale ought to be a mass without the stellar cohesive force - gravity. Therefore, if I find a body without gravity, it seems reasonable to assume it to be a super-neutron.'
'Do you consider that a rigorously scientific proof?' asked Sebastian sarcastically.
'No,' admitted Hayes, 'but it is logical, conflicts with no scientific fact I know of, and works out to form a consistent explanation of novae. That should be enough for our purpose at present.'
Murfree was gazing hard at his fingernails, 'And just where is this super-neutron of yours heading?'
'I see you anticipate,' said Hayes, sombrely. 'It was what I asked myself at the time. At 2.09 Ω today it hits the sun square, and eight minutes later, the radiation resulting from the explosion will sweep Earth to oblivion.'
'Why didn't you report all this?' barked Sebastian.
'Where was the use? There was nothing to be done about it. We can't handle astronomical masses. All the power available on Earth would not have sufficed to swerve that great body from its path. There was no escape within the Solar System itself, for Neptune and Pluto will turn gaseous along with the other planets, and interstellar travel is as yet impossible. Since man cannot exist independently in space, he is doomed.
'Why tell of all this? What would result after I had convinced them that the death warrant was signed? Suicides, crime waves, orgies, messiahs, evangelists and everything bad and futile you could think of. And after all, is death by nova so bad? It is instantaneous and clean. At 2.17 you're here. At 2.18 you are a mass of attenuated gas. It is so quick and easy a death, it is almost not death.'
There was a long silence after this. I felt uneasy. There are lies and lies, but this sounded like the real thing. Hayes didn't have that little quirk of the lip or that little gleam in the eye which marks the triumph of putting over a good one. He was deadly, deadly serious. I could see the others felt the same. Levin was gulping at his wine, hand shaking.
Finally, Sebastian coughed loudly, 'How long ago did you discover this super-neutron and where?'
'Fifteen years ago, a billion miles or better from the sun.'
'And all that time it has been approaching the sun?'
'Yes; at a constant speed of two miles per second.'
'Good, I've got you!' Sebastian almost laughed his relief. 'Why haven't the astronomers spotted it in all this while?'
'My God,' responded Hayes, impatiently, 'it's clear you aren't an astronomer. Now, what fool would look to the Southern Celestial Pole for a planet, when they're only found in the ecliptic?'
'But,' pointed out Sebastian, 'the region is studied just the same. It is photographed.'
'Surely! For all I know, the super-neutron has been photographed a hundred times - a thousand times if you like -though the Southern Pole is the most poorly watched region of the sky. But what's to differentiate it from a star? With its low albedo, it never passed eleventh magnitude in brightness. After all, it's hard enough to detect any planets in any case. Uranus was spotted many times before Herschel realized it was a planet. Pluto took years to find even when they were looking for it. Remember also that without gravity, it causes no planetary perturbation, and that the absence of these removes the most obvious indication of its presence.'
'But,' insisted Sebastian, desperately, 'as it approached the sun, its apparent size would increase and it would begin to show a perceptible disc through a telescope. Even if its reflected light were very faint, it would certainly obscure the stars behind it.'
'True,' admitted Hayes. 'I will not say that a really thorough mapping of the Polar Region would not have uncovered it, but such mapping has been done long ago, and the present cursory searches for novae, special spectral types and so on are by no means thorough. Then, as the super-neutron approaches the sun, it begins to appear only in the dawn and twilight - in evening and morning star fashion - so that observation becomes much more difficult. And so, as a matter of fact, it just has not been observed - and it is what should have been expected.'
Again a silence, and I became aware that my heart was pounding. It was two o'clock even, and we hadn't been able to shake Hayes' story. We had to prove it a lie fast, or I'd die of sheer suspense. We were all of us watching the clock.
Levin took up the fight. 'It's an awfully queer coincidence that the super-neutron should be heading straight for the sun. What are the chances against it? Remember, that would be the same thing as reciting the chances against the truth of the story.'
I interposed, 'That is an illegitimate objection, Mr. Levin. To cite improbability, however great, is not sufficient. Only outright impossibility or citation of inconsistency can serve to disqualify.'
But Hayes waved his hand, 'It's all right. Let me answer. Taking an individual super-neutron and an individual star, the chances of collision, head on, are all but infinitely small. However, statistically, if you shoot enough super-neutrons into the universe, then, given enough time, every star ought to be hit sooner or later. Space must be swarming with super-neutrons -say one every thousand cubic parsecs - so that in spite of the vast distances between the stars and the relative minuteness of the targets, twenty novae occur in our single Galaxy every year - that is, there are twenty collisions between super-neutrons and stars annually.
'The situation is no different really from uranium being bombarded with ordinary neutrons. Only one neutron out of a hundred million may score a hit, but, given time, every nucleus is exploded eventually. If there is an outer-universe intelligence directing this bombardment - pure hypothesis, and not part of my argument, please - a year to us is probably an infinitesimal fraction of a second to them. The hits, to them, may be occurring at the rate of billions to their seconds. Energy is being developed, perhaps, to the point where the material this universe composes has become heated to the gaseous state - or whatever passes for the gaseous state there. The universe is expanding, you know - like a gas.'
'Still, for the very first super-neutron entering our system to head straight for the sun seems-' Levin ended in a weak stammer.
'Good Lord,' snapped Hayes, 'who told you this was the first? Hundreds may have passed through the system in geologic times. One or two may have passed through in the last thousand years or so. How would we know? Even when one is headed straight for the sun, astronomers don't find it. Perhaps this is the only one that's passed through since the telescope
was invented, and before then, of courseÖAnd never forget
that, having no gravity, they can go right through the middle of the system, without affecting the planets. Only a hit on the sun registers, and then it's too late.'
He looked at the clock, '2.05! We ought to see it now against the sun.' He stood up and raised the window shade. The yellow sunlight streamed in and I moved away from the dusty shaft of light. My mouth was dry as desert sand. Murfree was mopping his brow, but beads of sweat stood out all along his cheeks and neck.
Hayes took out several slips of exposed film-negative and handed them out, 'I came prepared, you see.' He held one up and squinted at the sun. 'There it is,' he remarked placidly, 'My calculations showed it would be in transit with respect to Earth at the time of collision. Rather convenient!'
I was looking at the sun, too, and felt my heart skip a beat. There, quite clear against the brightness of the sun, was a little, perfectly round, black spot.
'Why doesn't it vaporize?' stammered Murfree. 'It must be almost in the sun's atmosphere.' I don't think he was trying to disprove Hayes' story. He had gone past that. He was honestly seeking information.
'I told you,' explained Hayes, 'that it is^ transparent to almost all solar radiation. Only the radiation it absorbs can go into heat and that's a very small percentage of all it receives. Besides, it isn't ordinary matter. It's probably much more re-factory than anything on Earth, and the Solar surface is only at 6,000 degrees Centigrade.'
He pointed a thumb over his shoulder, 'It's 2.09 Ω, gentlemen. The super-neutron has struck and death is on its way. We have eight minutes.'
We were dumb with something that was just simply unbearable terror. I remember Hayes' voice, quite matter-of-fact, saying, 'Mercury just went!' then a few minutes later, 'Venus has gone!' and lastly, 'Thirty seconds left, gentlemen!'
The seconds crawled, but passed at last, and another thirty seconds, and still anotherÖ
And on Hayes' face, a look of astonishment grew and spread. He lifted the clock and stared at it, then peered through his film at the sun once more.
'It's gone!' He turned and faced us, 'It's unbelievable. I had thought of it, but I dared not draw the atomic analogy too far. You know that not all atomic nuclei explode on being hit by a neutron. Some, cadmium, for instance, absorb them one after the other like sponges do water. I -'
He paused again, drew a deep breath, and continued musingly, 'Even the purest block of uranium contains traces of all other elements. And in a universe of trillions of stars acting like uranium, what does a paltry million of cadmium-like stars amount to - nothing! Yet the sun is one of them! Mankind never deserved that!'
He kept on talking, but relief had finally penetrated and we listened no longer. In half-hysterical fashion, we elected Gilbert Hayes to the office of Perpetual President by enthusiastic acclamation, and voted the story the whoppingest lie ever told.
But there's one thing that bothers me. Hayes fills his post well; the Society is more successful than ever - but 1 think he should have been disqualified after all. His story fulfilled the second condition; it sounded like the truth. But I don't think it fulfilled the first condition.
I think it was the truth!



***



I had series on my mind by now. 'Super-Neutron' was certainly intended to be but the first in a long chain of very clever and very ingenious tales to be told at the meetings of the 'Honorable Society of Ananias.' It didn't work out that way. There was never a second story, not even the beginnings of one, not even the idea for one.
By the time I was writing 'Super-Neutron,' in February of 1941,1 had heard of uranium fission and had even discussed it in some detail with Campbell. I managed to refer to it in the course of the story as 'the classical uranium fission method for power.' I also spoke of the metal cadmium as a neutron absorber. It wasn't bad for a story that appeared in 1941, and I sometimes quote it in public to create an impression.
Notice, though, that in the same paragraph in which I mention fission, I also talk of 'masurium.' Actually, masurium was the name given to element # 43 in 1926, but that discovery had proven a false alarm. The element was really discovered in 1937 and was given the now-accepted name of 'technetium.' It seems, then, that I could look years into the future and see uranium fission,as a practical power source, but I couldn't look a few years into the past and see the correct name for element #43.
This brings us to March 17, 1941, and one of the key turning points of my literary career.
By that day, I had written thirty-one stories. Of these I had already sold seventeen and was yet to sell four more. Of all these stories, three perhaps, and no more, were to turn out to be of more than ephemeral value, and those were the three 'positronic robots' stories I had so far written: 'Robbie,' 'Reason' and 'Liar!'
Looking back on my first three years as a writer, then, I can judge myself to be nothing more than a steady and (perhaps) hopeful third-rater. What's more, that's all I considered myself then, too. Nor did anyone else, at that time, seriously consider me as a potential first-magnitude star in the science fiction heavens - except, maybe, Campbell.
What are the odds, then, that on March 17, 1941, I would sit down and write something that for thirty years now has been considered by a surprising number of people to be the outstanding short classic of magazine science fiction? It was one of those things that couldn't possibly happen - yet it did.

It began when I walked into Campbell 's office that day and, as usual, suggested an idea. What it was I don't remember, but whatever it was he turned it down instantly, not because it was such a bad idea but because he had something he wanted to show me that crowded everything else out of his mind. He had come across a quotation from Ralph Waldo Emerson that went: 'If the stars should appear one night in a thousand years, how would men believe and adore, and preserve for many generations the remembrance of the city of God! ' [10]
Campbell asked me what I thought would happen if the stars would appear at only very long intervals. I had nothing intelligent to suggest.
'I think men would go mad,' he said thoughtfully.
We talked about that notion for quite a while, and I went home to write a story on the subject, one that Campbell and I decided from the start was to be called 'Nightfall.'
I began it that night. I can remember the details exactly: my parents' apartment on Windsor Place in Brooklyn, across the street from the candy store; my own room, just next to the living room, is clear in my mind, with the position of my bed, my desk, my typewriter - and myself getting started.
In years to come, fans would occasionally vote in polls designed to decide the best science fiction short stories of all time. Quite frequently, 'Nightfall' would finish in first place. Just a couple of years ago, the Science Fiction Writers of America polled their membership to decide the best science fiction short stories ever published, for inclusion in a Hall of Fame anthology. "Nightfall' finished in first place by a sizable margin. And, of course, it has been anthologized a dozen times so far.
With all this, one might argue that 'Nightfall' is the best (or at least the most popular) short science fiction story ever to appear in the magazines. Well, I often wonder, with a shudder, what might have happened on the evening of March 17, 1941, if some angelic spirit had whispered in my ear, 'Isaac, you are about to start writing the best short science fiction story of our time.'
I would undoubtedly have frozen solid. I wouldn't have been able to type a word.
But we don't know the future, and I tapped away blissfully, writing the story and completing it by April 9, 1941. That day, I submitted it to Campbell. He asked for a small revision. I took care of that, and on April 24, 1941, he bought the story.

It set several records for me. It was the longest story I had yet sold, a little over thirteen thousand words. Since Campbell paid me a bonus (my first one), the word rate was one and a quarter cents a word, and the total check was for $ 166, more than twice as large as any single payment I had ever before received. [11]
Then, too, 'Nightfall' appeared in the September 1941 issue of Astounding as the lead novelette. For the first time, I made the cover of that magazine, with 'Nightfall, by Isaac Asimov' in large, bold letters.
Most important of all, the appearance of 'Nightfall' graduated me by common consent (three years after I had begun my career) into the list of first-rank science fiction writers.

Alas, the story is not included here. It appears (of course) in Nightfall and Other Stories. [12]
The excitement of writing 'Nightfall' and Campbell 's hearty and unqualified praise of it ought, one might think, to have set me furiously to work at the typewriter, but it didn't. Spring 1941 was a bad time for me.
I could at any time that half year have left Columbia with a master's degree, but that would have done me no good. I had no job to go to, so I could only mark time and try to raise my value to some prospective employer by going on to the big one, the doctorate.
But that meant I had to take a series of elaborate, interminable 'qualifying examinations,' which I had to pass in order to be allowed to begin research without which I could not get the Ph.D. Passing was difficult and I didn't feel prepared at all, but I had to try it sometime, and besides, if I didn't fall short by too far, I would be allowed to continue taking courses and to repeat the qualifying examinations at some future date.
So in May I absented myself from the typewriter, studied earnestly for my qualifyings, took them - and didn't pass. I did well enough to earn the option of a future repeat, and I also received my M.A. as a kind of consolation prize, but I was badly disheartened all the same.
(And in the larger world outside, though Great Britain had survived air bombardment, Hitler still seemed unstoppable. He invaded the Balkans and was again winning spectacular victories, and that was disheartening, too.)
It was not till May 24, 1941, that I could bring myself to go back to my writing. I turned out 'Not Final!' which I submitted to Campbell on June 2. It was accepted on the sixth, but without a bonus.






Not Final! [13]


Nicholas Orloff inserted a monocle in his left eye with all the incorruptible Briticism of a Russian educated at Oxford and said reproachfully, 'But, my dear Mr. Secretary! Half a billion dollars!'
Leo Birnam shrugged his shoulders wearily and allowed his lank body to cramp up still farther in the chair, 'The appropriation must go through, commissioner. The Dominion government here at Ganymede is becoming desperate. So far, I've been holding them off, but as secretary of scientific affairs, my powers are small.'
'I know, but -' and Orloff spread his hands helplessly.
'I suppose so? agreed Birnam. 'The Empire government finds it easier to look the other way. They've done it consistently up to now. I've tried for a year now to have them understand the nature of the danger that hangs over the entire System, but it seems that it can't be done. But I'm appealing to you, Mr. Commissioner. You're new in your post and can approach this Jovian affair with an unjaundiced eye.'
Orloff coughed and eyed the tips of his boots. In the three months since he had succeeded Gridley as colonial commissioner he had tabled unread everything relating to 'those damned Jovian D.T.'s.' That had been according to the established cabinet policy which had labeled the Jovian affair as 'deadwood' long before he had entered office.
But now that Ganymede was becoming nasty, he found himself sent out to Jovopolis with instructions to hold the 'blasted provincials' down. It was a nasty spot.
Birnam was speaking, 'The Dominion government has reached the point where it needs the money so badly, in fact, that if they don't get it, they're going to publicize everything.'
Orloff's phlegm broke completely, and he snatched at the monocle as it dropped, 'My dear fellow!'
'I know what it would mean. I've advised against it, but they're justified. Once the inside of the Jovian affair is out; once the people know about it; the Empire government won't stay in power a week. And when the Technocrats come in, they'll give us whatever we ask. Public opinion will see to that'
'But you'll also create a panic and hysteria -'
'Surely! That is why we hesitate. But you might call this an ultimatum. We want secrecy, we need secrecy; but we need money more.'
'I see.' Orloff was thinking rapidly, and the conclusions he came to were not pleasant. 'In that case, it would be advisable to investigate the case further. If you have the papers concerning the communications with the planet Jupiter -'
'I have them,' replied Birnam, dryly, 'and so has the Empire government at Washington. That won't do, commissioner. It's the same cud that's been chewed by Earth officials for the last year, and it's gotten us nowhere. I want you to come to Ether Station with me.'
The Ganymedan had risen from his chair, and he glowered down upon Orloff from his six and a half feet of height.
Orloff flushed, 'Are you ordering me?'
'In a way, yes, I tell you there is no time. If you intend acting, you must act quickly or not at all.' Birnam paused, then added, 'You don't mind walking, I hope. Power vehicles aren't allowed to approach Ether Station, ordinarily, and I can use the walk to explain a few of the facts. It's only two miles off.'
'I'll walk,' was the brusque reply.
The trip upward to subground level was made in silence, which was broken by Orloff when they stepped into the dimly lit anteroom.
'It's chilly here.'.
T know. It's difficult to keep the temperature up to norm this near the surface. But it will be colder outside. Here!'
Birnam had kicked open a closet door and was indicating the garments suspended from the ceiling. 'Put them on. You'll need them.'
Orloff fingered them doubtfully, 'Are they heavy enough?'
Birnam was pouring into his own costume as he spoke. 'They're electrically heated. You'll find them plenty warm. That's it! Tuck the trouser legs "inside the boots and lace them tight.'
He turned then and, with a grunt, brought out a double compressed-gas cylinder from its rack in one corner of the closet. He glanced at the dial reading; and then turned the stopcock. There was a thin wheeze of escaping gas, at which Birnam sniffed with satisfaction.
'Do you know how to work one of these?' he asked, as he screwed onto the jet a flexible tube of metal mesh, at the other end of which was a curiously curved object of thick, clear glass.
'What is it?'
'Oxygen nosepiece! What there is of Ganymede's atmosphere is argon and nitrogen, just about half arid half. It isn't particularly breathable.' He heaved the double cylinder into position, and tightened it in its harness on Orloff's back.
Orloff staggered, 'It's heavy. I can't walk two miles with this.'
'It won't be heavy out there,' Birnam nodded carelessly upward and lowered the glass nosepiece over Orloff's head. 'Just remember to breathe in through the nose and out through the mouth, and you won't have any trouble. By the way, did you eat recently?'
'I lunched before I came to your place.'
Birnam sniffed dubiously, 'Well, that's a little awkward.' He drew a small metal container from one of his pockets and tossed it to the commissioner. 'Put one of those pills in your mouth and keep sucking on it.'
Orloff worked clumsily with gloved fingers and finally managed to get a brown spheroid out of the tin and into his mouth. He followed Birnam up a gently sloped ramp. The blind-alley ending of the corridor slid aside smoothly when they reached it and there was a faint soughing as air slipped out into the thinner atmosphere of Ganymede.
Birnam caught the other's elbow, and fairly dragged him out.
'I've turned your air tank on full,' he shouted. 'Breathe deeply and keep sucking at that pill,'
Gravity had flicked to Ganymedan normality as they crossed the threshold and Orloff after one horrible moment of apparent levitation, felt his stomach turn a somersault and explode.
He gagged, and fumbled the pill with his tongue in desperate attempt at self-control. The oxygen-rich mixture from the air cylinders burned his throat, and gradually Ganymede steadied. His stomach shuddered back into place. He tried walking.
'Take it easy, now,' came Birnam's soothing voice. 'It gets you that way the first few times you change gravity fields quickly. Walk slowly and get the rhythm, or you'll take a tumble. That's right, you're getting it.'
The ground seemed resilient. Orloff could feel the pressure of the other's arm holding him down at each step to keep him from springing too high. Steps were longer now - and flatter, as he got the rhythm. Birnam continued speaking, a voice a little muffled from behind the leather flap drawn loosely across mouth and chin.
'Each to his own world,' he grinned. 'I visited Earth a few years back, with my wife, and had a hell of a time. I couldn't get myself to learn to walk on a planet's surface without a nosepiece. I kept choking - I really did. The sunlight was too bright and the sky was too blue and the grass was too green. And the buildings were right out on the surface. I'll never forget the time they tried to get me to sleep in a room twenty stories up in the air, with the window wide open and the moon shining in.
'I went back on the first spaceship going my way and don't ever intend returning. How are you feeling now?'
'Fine! Splendid!' Now that the first discomfort had gone. Orloff found the low gravity exhilarating. He looked about him. The broken, hilly ground, bathed in a drenching yellow light, was covered with ground-hugging broad-leaved shrubs that showed the orderly arrangement of careful cultivation.
Birnam answered the unspoken question, There's enough carbon dioxide in the air to keep the plants alive, and they all have the power to fix atmospheric nitrogen. That's what makes agriculture Ganymede's greatest industry. Those plants are worth their weight in gold as fertilizers back on Earth and worth double or triple that as sources for half a hundred alkaloids that can't be gotten anywhere else in the System. And, of course, everyone knows that Ganymedan green-leaf has Terrestrial tobacco beat hollow.'
There was the drone of a strato-rocket overhead, shrill in the thin atmosphere, and Orloff looked up.
He stopped - stopped dead - and forgot to breathe!
It was his first glimpse of Jupiter in the sky.
It is one thing to see Jupiter, coldly harsh, against the ebon backdrop of space. At six hundred thousand miles, it is majestic enough. But on Ganymede, barely topping the hills, its outlines softened and ever so faintly hazed by the thin atmosphere; shining mellowly from a purple sky in which only a few fugitive stars dare compete with the Jovian giant - it can be described by no conceivable combination of words.
At first, Orloff absorbed the gibbous disk in silence. It was gigantic, thirty-two times the apparent diameter of the Sun as seen from Earth. Its stripes stood out in faint washes of color against the yellowness beneath and the Great Red Spot was an oval splotch of orange near the western rim.
And finally Orloff murmured weakly, 'It's beautiful!'
Leo Birnam stared, too, but there was no awe in his eyes. There was the mechanical weariness of viewing a sight often seen, and besides that an expression of sick revulsion. The chin flap hid his twitching smile, but his grasp upon Orloff's arm left bruises through the tough fabric of the surface suit.
He said slowly, 'It's the most horrible sight in the System."
Orloff turned reluctant attention to his companion, 'Eh?' Then, disagreeably, 'Oh, yes, those mysterious Jovians.'
At that, the Ganymedan turned away angrily and broke into swinging, fifteen-foot strides. Orloff followed clumsily after, keeping his balance with difficulty.
'Here, now,' he gasped.
But Birnam wasn't listening. He was speaking coldly, bitterly, 'You on Earth can afford to ignore Jupiter. You know nothing of it. It's a little pin prick in your sky, a little flyspeck. You don't live here on Ganymede, watching that damned colossus gloating over you. Up and over fifteen hours - hiding God knows what on its surface. Hiding something that's waiting and waiting and trying to get out. Like a giant bomb just waiting to explode!'
'Nonsense!' Orloff managed to jerk out. 'Will you slow down. I can't keep up.'
Birnam cut his strides in half and said tensely, 'Everyone knows that Jupiter is inhabited, but practically no one ever stops to realize what that means. I tell you that those Jovians, whatever they are, are born to the purple. They are the natural rulers of the Solar System.'
'Pure hysteria,' muttered Orloff. 'The Empire government has been hearing.nothing else from your Dominion for a year.'
'And you've shrugged it off. Well, listen! Jupiter, discounting the thickness of its colossal atmosphere, is eighty thousand miles in diameter. That means it possesses a surface one hundred times that of Earth, and more than fifty times that of the entire Terrestrial Empire. Its population, its resources, its war potential are in proportion.'
'Mere numbers -'
'I know what you mean,' Birnam drove on, passionately. 'Wars are not fought with numbers, but with science and with organization. The Jovians have both. In the quarter of a century during which we have communicated with them, we've learned a bit. They have atomic power and they have radio. And in a world of ammonia under great pressure - a world in other words in which almost none of the metals can exist as metals for any length of time because of the tendency to form soluble ammonia complexes - they have managed to build up a complicated civilization. That means they have had to work through plastics, glasses, silicates and synthetic building materials of one sort or another. That means a chemistry developed just as far as ours is, and I'd put odds on its having developed further.'
Orloff waited long before answering. And then, 'But how certain are you people about the Jovians' last message. We on Earth are inclined to doubt that the Jovians can possibly be as unreasonably belligerent as they have been described.'
The Ganymedan laughed shortly, They broke off all communication after that last message, didn't they? That doesn't sound friendly on their part, does it? I assure you that we've all but stood on our ears trying to contact them.
'Here now, don't talk. Let me explain something to you. For twenty-five years here on Ganymede a little group of men have worked their hearts out trying to make sense out of the static-ridden, gravity-distorted set of variable clicks in our radio apparatus, for those clicks were our only connection with living intelligence upon Jupiter. It was a job for a world of scientists, but we never had more than two dozen at the Station at any one time. I was one of them from the very beginning and, as a philologist, did my part in helping construct and interpret the code that developed between ourselves and the Jovians, so that you can see I am speaking from the real inside.
'It was a devil of a heartbreaking job. It was five years before we got past the elementary clicks of arithmetic: three and four are seven; the square root of twenty-five is five; factorial six is seven hundred and twenty. After that, months sometimes passed before we could work out and check by further communication a single new fragment of thought.
'But - and this is the point - by the time the Jovians broke off relations, we understood them thoroughly. There was no more chance of a mistake in comprehension, than there was of Ganymede suddenly cutting loose from Jupiter. And their last message was a threat, and a promise of destruction. Oh, there's no doubt - there's no doubt!'
They were walking through a shallow pass in which the yellow lupiter light gave way to a clammy darkness.
Orloff was disturbed. He had never had the case presented to him in this fashion before. He said, 'But the reason, man. What reason did we give them -'
'No reason! It was simply this: the Jovians had finally discovered from our messages - just where and how I don't know - that we were not Jovians.'
'Well, of course.'
'It wasn't "of course" to them. In their experiences they had never come across intelligences that were not Jovian. Why should they make an exception in favour of those from outer space?'
'You say they were scientists.' Orloff's voice had assumed a wary frigidity. 'Wouldn't they realize that alien environments would breed alien life? We knew it. We never thought the Jovians were Earthmen though we had never met intelligences other than those of Earth.'
They were back in the drenching wash of Jupiter light again, and a spreading region of ice glimmered amberly in a de-pression to the right.
Birnam answered, 'I said they were chemists and physicists -but I never said they were astronomers. Jupiter, my dear commissioner, has an atmosphere three thousand miles or more thick, and those miles of gas block off everything but the Sun and the four largest of Jupiter's moons. The Jovians know nothing of alien environments.'
Orloff considered. 'And so they decided we were aliens.
What next?'
'If we weren't Jovians, then, in their eyes, we weren't people. It turned out that a non-Jovian was "vermin" by definition.'
Orloff's automatic protest was cut off short by Birnam, 'In their eyes, I said, vermin we were; and vermin we are. Moreover, we were vermin with the peculiar audacity of having dared to attempt to treat with Jovians - with human beings. Their last message was this, word for word - "Jovians are the masters. There is no room for vermin. We will destroy you immediately." I doubt if there was any animosity in that message - simply a cold statement of fact. But they meant it.'
'But why?'
'Why did man exterminate the housefly?'
'Come, sir. You're not seriously presenting an analogy of that nature.'
'Why not, since it is certain that the Jovian considers us a sort of housefly - an insufferable type of housefly that dares aspire to intelligence.'
Orloff made a last attempt, 'But truly, Mr. Secretary, it seems impossible for intelligent life to adopt such an attitude.'
'Do you possess much of an acquaintance with any other type of intelligent life than our own?' came with immediate sarcasm. 'Do you feel competent to pass on Jovian psychology? Do you know just how alien Jovians must be physically? Just think of their world with its gravity at two and one half Earth normal; with its ammonia oceans - oceans that you might throw all Earth into without raising a respectable splash; with its three-thousand-mile atmosphere, dragged down by the colossal gravity into densities and pressures in its surface layers that make the sea bottoms of Earth resemble a medium-thick vacuum. I tell you we've tried to figure out what sort of life could exist under those conditions and we've given up. It's thoroughly incomprehensible. Do you expect their mentality, then, to be any more understandable? Never! Accept it as it is. They intend destroying us. That's all we know and all we need to know.'
He lifted a gloved hand as he finished and one finger pointed, 'There's Ether Station just ahead.'
Orloff's head swiveled, 'Underground?'
'Certainly! All except the Observatory. That's that steel and quartz dome to the right - the small one.'
They had stopped before two large boulders that flanked an earthy embankment, and from behind either one a nosepieced, suited soldier in Ganymedan orange, with blasters ready, advanced upon the two.
Birnam lifted his face into Jupiter's light and the soldiers saluted and stepped aside. A short word was barked into the wrist mike of one of them and the camouflaged opening between the boulders fell into two and Orloff followed the secretary into the yawning air lock.
The Earthman caught one last glimpse of sprawling Jupiter before the closing door cut off the surface altogether.
It was no longer beautiful!
Orloff did not quite feel normal again until he had seated himself in the overstuffed chair in Dr. Edward Prosser's private office. With a sigh of utter relaxation, he propped his monocle under his eyebrow.
'Would Dr. Prosser mind if I smoked in here, while we're waiting?' he asked.
'Go ahead,' replied Birnam, carelessly. 'My own idea would be to drag Prosser away from whatever he's fooling with just now, but he's a queer chap. We'll get more out of him if we wait until he's ready for us.' He withdrew a gnarled stick of greenish tobacco from its case, and bit off the edge viciously.
Orloff smiled through the smoke of his own cigarette, 'I don't mind waiting. I still have something to say. You see, for the moment, Mr. Secretary, you gave me the jitters, but, after all, granted that the Jovians intend mischief once they get at us, it remains a fact,' and here he spaced his words emphatically, 'that they can't get at us.'
'A bomb without a fuse, hey?'
'Exactly! It's simplicity itself, and not really worth discussing. You will admit, I suppose, that under no circumstances can the Jovians get away from Jupiter.'
'Under no circumstances?' There was a quizzical tinge in Birnam's slow reply. 'Shall we analyze that?'
He stared hard at the purple flame of his cigar. 'It's an old trite saying that the Jovians can't leave Jupiter. The fact has been highly publicized by the sensation-mongers of Earth and Ganymede and a great deal of sentiment has been driveled about the unfortunate intelligences who are irrevocably surface-bound, and must forever stare into the Universe without, watching, watching, wondering, and never attaining.
'But, after all, what holds the Jovians to their planet? Two factors! That's all! The first is the immense gravity field of the planet. Two and a half Earth normal.'
Orloff nodded. 'Pretty bad!' he agreed.
'And Jupiter's gravitational potential is even worse, for because of its greater diameter the intensity of its gravitational field decreases with distance only one tenth as rapidly as Earth's field does. It's a terrible problem - but it's been solved.'
'Hey?' Orloff straightened.
'They've got atomic power. Gravity - even Jupiter's - means nothing once you've put unstable atomic nuclei to work for you.'
Orloff crushed his cigarette to extinction with a nervous gesture. 'But their atmosphere -'
'Yes, that's what's stopping them. They're living at the bottom of a three-thousand-mile-deep ocean of it, where the hydrogen of which it is composed is collapsed by sheer pressure to something approaching the density of solid hydrogen. It stays a gas because the temperature of Jupiter is above the critical point of hydrogen, but you just try to figure put the pressure that can make hydrogen gas half as heavy as water. You'll be surprised at the number of zeros you'll have to put down.
'No spaceship of metal or of any kind of matter can stand that pressure. No Terrestrial spaceship can land on Jupiter without smashing like an eggshell, and no Jovian spaceship can leave Jupiter without exploding like a soap bubble. That problem has not yet been solved, but it will be some day. Maybe tomorrow, maybe not for a hundred years, or a thousand. We don't know, but when it is solved, the Jovians will be on top of us. And it can be solved in a specific way.'
'I don't see how -'
'Force fields! We've got them now, you know.'
'Force fields!' Orloff seemed genuinely astonished, and he chewed the word over and over to himself for a few moments. 'They're used as meteor shields for ships in the asteroid zone -but I don't see the application to the Jovian problem.'
'The ordinary force field,' explained Birnam, 'is a feeble rarefied zone of energy extending over a hundred miles or more outside the ship. It'll stop meteors but it's just so much empty ether to an object like a gas molecule. But what if you took that same zone of energy and compressed it to a thickness of a tenth of an inch. Molecules would bounce off it like this - ping-g-g-g! And if you used stronger generators, and compressed the field to a hundredth of an inch, molecules would bounce off even when driven by the unthinkable pressure of Jupiter's atmosphere - and then if you build a ship inside-' He left the sentence dangling.
Orloff was pale. 'You're not saying it can be done?'
'I'll bet you anything you like that the Jovians are trying to do it. And we're trying to do it right here at Ether Station.'
The colonial commissioner jerked his chair closer to Birnam and grabbed the Ganymedan's wrist. 'Why can't we bombard Jupiter with atomic bombs. Give it a thorough going-over, I mean! With her gravity, and her surface area, we can't miss.'
Birnam smiled faintly, 'We've thought of that. But atomic bombs would merely tear holes in the atmosphere. And even if you could penetrate, just divide the surface of Jupiter by the area of damage of a single bomb and find how many years we must bombard Jupiter at the rate of a bomb a minute before we begin to do significant damage. Jupiter's big! Don't ever forget that!'
His cigar had gone out, but he did not pause to relight. He continued in a low, tense voice. 'No, we can't attack the Jovians as long as they're on Jupiter. We must wait for them to come out - and once they do, they're going to have the edge on us in numbers. A terrific, heart-breaking edge - so we'll just have to have the edge on them in science.'
'But,' Orloff broke in, and there was a note of fascinated horror in his voice, 'how can we tell in advance what they'll have?'
'We can't. We've got to scrape up everything we can lay our hands on and hope for the best. But there's one thing we do know they'll have and that's force fields. They can't get out without them. And if they have them, we must, too, and that's the problem we're trying to solve here. They will not insure us victory, but without them, we will suffer certain defeat. And now you know why we need money - and more than that. We want Earth itself to get to work. It's got to start a drive for scientific armaments and subordinate everything to that. You see?'
Orloff was on his feet. 'Birnam, I'm with you - a hundred percent with you. You can count on me back in Washington.'
There was no mistaking his sincerity. Birnam gripped the hand outstretched toward him and wrung it - and at the moment, the door flew open and a little pixie of a man hurtled in.
The newcomer spoke in rapid jerks, and exclusively to Birnam. 'Where'd you come from? Been trying to get in touch with you. Secretary said you weren't in. Then five minutes later you show up on your own. Can't understand it.' He busied himself furiously at his desk.
Birnam grinned. 'If you'll take time out, doc, you might say hello to Colonial Commissioner Orloff.'
Dr. Edward Prosser turned on his toe like a ballet dancer and" looked the Earthman up and down twice. The new un, hey? We getting any money? We ought to. Been working on a shoestring ever since. At that, we might not be needing any. It depends.' He was back at the desk.
Orloff seemed a trifle disconcerted, but Birnam winked impressively, and he contented himself with a glassy stare through the monocle.
Prosser pounced upon a black leather booklet in the recesses of a pigeonhole, threw himself into his swivel chair and wheeled about.
'Glad you came, Birnam,' he said, leafing through the booklet. 'Got something to show you. Commissioner Orloff, too.'
'What were you keeping us waiting for?' demanded Birnam. 'Where were you?'
'Busy! Busy as a pig! No sleep for three nights.' He looked up, and his small puckered face fairly flushed with delight. 'Everything fell into place of a sudden. Like a jig-saw puzzle. Never saw anything like it. Kept us hopping, I tell you.'
'You've gotten the dense force fields you're after?' asked Orloff in sudden excitement.
Prosser seemed annoyed. 'No, not that. Something else. Come on.' He glared at his watch and jumped out of his seat. 'We've got half an hour. Let's go.'
An electric-motored flivver waited outside and Prosser spoke excitedly as he sped the purring vehicle down the ramps into the depths of the Station.
'Theory!' he said. 'Theory! Damned important, that. You set a technician on a problem. He'll fool around. Waste lifetimes. Get nowhere. Just putter about at random. A true scientist works with theory. Lets math solve his problems.' He overflowed with self-satisf action.
The flivver stopped on a dime before a huge double door and Prosser tumbled out, followed by the other two at a more leisurely pace.
'Through here! Through here!' he said. He shoved the door open and led them down the corridor and up a narrow flight of stairs onto a wall-hugging passageway that circled a huge three-level room. Orloff recognized the gleaming quartz-and-steel pipe-sprouting ellipsoid two levels below as an atomic generator.
He adjusted his monocle and watched the scurrying activity below. An earphoned man on a high stool before a control board studded with dials looked up and waved. Prosser waved back and grinned.
Orloff said, 'You create your force fields here?'
'That's right! Ever see one?'
'No.' The commissioner smiled, ruefully. 'I don't even know what one is, except that it can be used as a meteor shield.'
Prosser said, 'It's very simple. Elementary matter. All matter is composed of atoms. Atoms are held together by interatomic forces. Take away atoms. Leave interatomic forces behind. That's a force field.'
Orloff looked blank, and Birnam chuckled deep in his throat and scratched the back of his ear.
'That explanation reminds me of our Ganymedan method of suspending an egg a mile high in the air. It goes like this. You find a mountain just a mile high and put the egg on top. Then, keeping the egg where it is, you take the mountain way. That's all.'
The colonial commissioner threw his head back to laugh, and the irascible Dr. Prosser puckered his lips in a pursed symbol of disapproval.
'Come, come. No joke, you know. Force fields most important. Got to be ready for the Jovians when they come.'
A sudden rasping bur from below sent Prosser back from the railing.
'Get behind screen here,' he babbled. 'The twenty-millimeter field is going up. Bad radiation.'
The bur muted almost into silence, and the three walked out onto the passageway again. There was no apparent change, but Prosser shoved his hand out over the railing and said,, 'Feel!'
Orloff extended a cautious finger, gasped, and slapped out with the palm of his hand. It was like pushing against very soft sponge rubber or superresilient steel springs.
Birnam tried, too. 'That's better than anything we've done yet, isn't it?' He explained to Orloff, 'A twenty-millimeter screen is one that can hold an atmosphere of a pressure of twenty millimeters of mercury against a vacuum without appreciable leakage.'
The commissioner nodded, 'I see! You'd need a seven-hundred-sixty-millimeter screen to hold Earth's atmosphere then.'
'Yes! That would be a unit atmosphere screen. Well, Prosser, is this what got you excited?'
'This twenty-millimeter screen? Of course not. I can go up to two hundred fifty millimeters using the activated vanadium pentasulphide in the praseodymium breakdown. But it's not necessary. Technician would do it and blow up the place. Scientist checks on theory and goes slow,' He winked. 'We're hardening the field now. Watch!'
'Shall we get behind the screen?'
'Not necessary now. Radiation bad only at beginning.'
The burring waxed again, but not as loudly as before. Prosser shouted to the man at the control board, and a spreading wave of the hand was the only reply.
Then the control man waved a clenched fist and Prosser cried, 'We've passed fifty millimeters! Feel the field!'
Orloff extended his hand and poked it curiously. The sponge rubber had hardened! He tried to pinch it between finger and thumb so perfect was the illusion, but here the 'rubber' faded to unresisting air.
Prosser tch-tched impatiently. 'No resistance at right angles to force. Elementary mechanics, that is.'
The control man was gesturing again., 'Past seventy,' explained Prbsser. 'We're slowing down now. Critical point is 83-42.'
He hung over the railing and kicked out with his feet at the other two. 'Stay away! Dangerous!'
And then he yelled, 'Careful! The generator's bucking!'
The bur had risen to a hoarse maximum and the control man worked frantically at his switches. From within the quartz heart of the central atomic generator, the sullen red glow of the bursting atoms had brightened dangerously.
There was a break in the bur, a reverberant roar and a blast of air that threw Orloff hard against the wall.
Prosser dashed up. There was a cut over his eye. 'Hurt? No? Good, good! I was expecting something of the sort. Should have warned you. Let's go down. Where's Birnam?'
The tall Ganymedan picked himself up off the floor and brushed at his clothes. 'Here I am. What blew up?'
'Nothing blew up. Something buckled. Come on, down we go.' He dabbed at, his forehead with a handkerchief and led the way downward.
The control man removed his earphones as he approached and got off his stool. He looked tired, and his dirt-smeared face was greasy with perspiration.
'The damn thing started going at 82.8, boss. It almost caught me.'
'It did, did it?' growled Prosser. 'Within limits of error, isn't it? How's the generator? Hey, Stoddard!'
The technician addressed replied from his station at the generator, 'Tube 5 died. It'll take two days to replace.'
Prosser turned in satisfaction and said, 'It worked. Went exactly as presumed. Problem solved, gentlemen. Trouble over. Let's get back to rny office. I want to eat. And then I want to sleep.'
He did not refer to the subject again until once more behind the desk in his office, and then he spoke between huge bites of a liver-and-onion sandwich.
He addressed Birnam, 'Remember the work on space strain last June. It flopped, but we kept at it. Finch got a lead last week and I developed it. Everything fell into place. Slick as goose grease. Never saw anything like it.'
'Go ahead,' said Birnam, calmly. He knew Prosser sufficiently well to avoid showing impatience.
'You saw what happened. When a field tops 83.42 millimeters, it becomes unstable. Space won't stand the strain. It buckles and the field blows. Boom!'
Birnam's mouth dropped open and the arms of Orloff's chair creaked under sudden pressure. Silence for a while, and then Birnam said unsteadily, 'You mean force fields stronger than that are impossible?'
'They're possible. You can create them. But the denser they are, the more unstable they are. If I had turned on the two-hundred-and-fifty-millimeter field, it would have lasted one tenth of a second. Then, blooie! Would have blown up the Station! And myself! Technician would have done it. Scientist is warned by theory. Works carefully, the way I did. No harm done.'
Orloff tucked his monocle into his vest pocket and said tremulously, 'But if a force field is the same thing as interatomic forces, why is it that steel has such a strong interatomic binding force without bucking space? There's a flaw there.'
Prosser eyed him in annoyance. 'No flaw. Critical strength depends on number of generators. In steel, each atom is a force-field generator. That means about three hundred billion trillion generators for every ounce of matter. If we could use that many- As it is, one hundred generators would be the practical limit. That only raises the critical point to ninety-seven or thereabout.'
He got to his feet and continued with sudden fervor, 'No. Problem's over, I tell you. Absolutely impossible to create a force field capable of holding Earth's atmosphere for more than a hundredth of a second. Jovian atmosphere entirely out of question. Cold figures say that; backed by experiment. Space won't stand it!
'Let the Jovians do their damnedest. They can't get out! That's final! That's final! That's final!'
Orloff said, 'Mr. Secretary, can I send a spacegram anywhere in the Station? I want to tell Earth that I'm returning by the next ship and that the Jovian problem is liquidated - entirely and for good.'
Birnam said nothing, but the relief on his face as he shook hands with the colonial commissioner, transfigured the gaunt homeliness of it unbelievably.
And Dr. Prosser repeated, with a birdlike jerk of his head, 'That's final!'
Hal Tuttle looked up as Captain Everett of the spaceship Transparent, newest ship of the Comet Space Lines, entered his private observation room in the nose of the ship.
The captain said, 'A spacegram has just reached me from the home offices at Tucson. We're to pick up Colonel Commissioner Orloff at Jovopolis, Ganymede, and take him back to Earth.'
'Good. We haven't sighted any ships?'
'No, no! We're way off the regular space lanes. The first the System will know of us will be the landing of the Transparent on Ganymede. It will be the greatest thing in space travel since the first trip to the Moon.' His voice softened suddenly, 'What's wrong, Hal? This is your triumph, after all.'
Hal Tuttle looked up and out into the blackness of space. 'I suppose it is. Ten years of work, Sam. I lost an arm and an eye in that first explosion, but I don't regret them. It's the reaction that's got me. The problem is solved; my lifework is finished.'
'So is every steel-hulled ship in the System.'
Tuttle smiled. 'Yes. It's hard to realize, isn't it?' He gestured outward. 'You see the stars? Part of the time, there's nothing between them and us. It gives me a queazy feeling.' His voice brooded, 'Nine years I worked for nothing. I wasn't a theoretician, and never really knew where I was headed -just tried everything. I tried a little too hard and space wouldn't stand it. I paid an arm and an eye and started fresh.'
Captain Everett balled his fist and pounded the hull - the hull through which the stars shone unobstructed. There was the muffled thud of flesh striking an unyielding surface - but no response whatever from the invisible wall.
Tuttle nodded, 'It's solid enough, now - though it flicks on and off eight hundred thousand times a second. I got the idea from the stroboscopic lamp. You know them - they flash on and off so rapidly that it gives all the impression of steady illumination.
'And so it is with the hull. It's not on long enough to buckle space. It's not off long enough to allow appreciable leakage of the atmosphere. And the net effect is a strength better than steel.'
He paused and added slowly, 'And there's no telling how far we can go. Speed up the intermission effect. Have the field flick off and on millions of times per second - billions of times. You can get fields strong enough to hold an atomic explosion. My lif ework!'
Captain Everett pounded the other's shoulder. 'Snap out of it, man. Think of the landing on Ganymede. The devil! It will be great publicity. Think of Orloff's face, for instance, when he finds he is to be the first passenger in history ever to travel in a spaceship with a force-field hull. How do you suppose he'll feel?'
Hal Tuttle shrugged. 'I imagine he'll be rather pleased.'



***



With 'Not Final!' I completed my third year as a Writer -three years since my initial trip to Campbell 's office. In that time I had earned just a hair short of a thousand dollars (not as bad as it sounds in days when college tuition was only four hundred dollars a year) and I had about a quarter of that in my savings account.
Still, you can see that there was nothing in that financial record to lead me to think that writing was a possible way of making a living - especially since I had no dream of ever writing anything but magazine science fiction.
On June 10, 1941, in the course of a talk with Fred Pohl, I mentioned my frustration at not being able to make a sale to Unknown. Fred said he had a good idea for a fantasy, and from that it was a short step to an agreement to go halfies. We'd talk the idea over, I would write it, and we'd split the sale, if any, fifty-fifty.
Fred must have been willing because (as I found out three days later) his magazines were doing poorly and he was being relieved of his editorial position.
It was too bad, of course, but not an irredeemable catastrophe. Pohl had had nearly two years of valuable editorial experience, and the time would come when this would stand him in good stead in a much more important and longer-enduring role as editor of Galaxy, which during the 1950s and 1960s was to compete with Astounding for leadership in the field.
As for myself, I could scarcely complain. Pohl had accepted eight of my stories (over a quarter of those I had written and nearly half of those I had sold up to then). Of these, six had already been published and one ('Super-Neutron') was safely slated for publication in the forthcoming issue of Astonishing. That left the ninth, 'Christmas on Ganymede.' It was not yet paid for, nor had it actually been set in type, and, regretfully, Pohl had to return it. However, I sold it within two weeks to Thrilling Wonder Stories for a little more than Pohl would have been able to pay me, so no harm was done even there. -And though I regretted the loss of a market, Pohl had safely seen me through the period during which I developed to the point where Campbell and Astounding itself could become my major market.
At first, when 'Christmas on Ganymede' was returned, I thought it was because the Pohl magazines had been suspended altogether. If the publishers had intended that, they changed their minds. Astonishing continued a couple of years, until it was killed by the World War II paper shortage. Super Science Stones survived World War II and even a little past the 1940s, and was yet to publish one more story of mine.
But back to June 10- Taking Fred's fantasy idea, I wrote the story entirely on my own, calling it 'Legal Rights.' Once again, though, a collaboration didn't succeed. On July 8, Campbell rejected it, the first rejection I had received from him in half a year.
By that time, though, Fred was agenting again. I gave him the story, rather shamefacedly, and forgot about it. He changed the name to 'Legal Rites' (much better) and rewrote it quite a bit. Seven years later, he actually-sold it.






Legal Rites (with James.MacCreigh)
[14]


Already the stars were out, though the sun had just dipped under the horizon, and the sky of the west was a blood-stuck gold behind the Sierra Nevadas.
'Hey!' squawked Russell Harley. 'Come back!'
But the one-lunged motor of the old Ford was making too much noise; the driver didn't hear him. Harley cursed as he watched the old car careen along the sandy ruts on its half-flat tires. Its taillight was saying a red no to him. No, you can't get away tonight; no, you'll have to stay here and fight it out.
Harley grunted and climbed back up the porch stairs of the old wooden house. It was well made, anyhow. The stairs, though half a century old, neither creaked beneath him nor showed cracks.
Harley picked up the bags he'd dropped when he experienced his abrupt change of mind - fake leather and worn out, they were - and carted them into the house. He dumped them on a dust-jacketed sofa and looked around.
It was stifling hot, and the smell of the desert outside had permeated the room. Harley sneezed.
'Water,' he said out loud. 'That's what I need.'
He'd prowled through every room on the ground floor before he stopped still and smote his head. Plumbing - naturally there'd be no plumbing in this hole eight miles out on the desert! A well was the best he could hope for -
If that.
It was getting dark. No electric lights either, of course. He blundered irritatedly through the dusky rooms to the back of the house. The screen door shrieked metallically as he opened it. A bucket hung by the door. He picked it up, tipped it, shook the loose sand out of it. He looked over the 'back yard' - about thirty thousand visible acres of hilly sand, rock and patches of- sage and flame-tipped ocotillo.
No well.
The old fool got water from somewhere, he thought savagely. Obstinately he climbed down the back steps and wandered out into the desert. Overhead the stars were blinding, a million million of them, but the sunset was over already and he could see only hazily. The silence was murderous. Only a faint whisper of breeze over the sand, and the slither of his shoes.
He caught a glimmer of starlight from the nearest clump of sage and walked to it. There was a pool of water, caught in the angle of two enormous boulders. He stared at it doubtfully, then shrugged. It was water. It was better than nothing. He dipped the bucket in the little pool. Knowing nothing of the procedure, he filled it with a quart of loose sand as he scooped it along the bottom/When he lifted it, brimful, to his lips, he spat out the first mouthful and swore violently.
Then he used his head. He set the bucket down, waited a, second for the sand grains to settle, cupped water in his hands, lifted it to his lipsÖ
Pat. HISS. Pat. HISS. Pat. HISS -
'What the hell!' Harley stood up, looked around in abrupt puzzlement. It sounded like water dripping from somewhere, onto a red-hot stove, flashing into sizzling steam. He saw nothing, only the sand and the sage and the pool of tepid, sickly water.
Pat. HISS -
Then he saw it, and his eyes bulged. Out of nowhere it was dripping, a drop a second, a sticky, dark drop that was thicker than water, that fell to the ground lazily, in slow defiance of gravity. And when it struck each drop sizzled and skittered about, and vanished. It was perhaps eight feet from him, just visible in the starlight.
And then, 'Get off my land!' said the voice from nowhere.
Harley got. By the time he got to Rebel Butte three hours later, he was barely managing to walk, wishing desperately that he'd delayed long enough for one more good drink of water, despite all the fiends of hell. But he'd run the first three miles. He'd had plenty of encouragement. He remembered with a shudder how the clear desert air had taken milky shape around the incredible trickle of dampness and had advanced on him theateningly.
And when he got to the first kerosene-lighted saloon of Rebel Butte, and staggered inside, the saloonkeeper's fascinated stare at the front of his shoddy coat showed him strong evidence that he hadn't been suddenly taken with insanity, or drunk on the unaccustomed sensation of fresh desert air. All down the front of him it was, and the harder he rubbed the harder it stayed, the stickier it got. Blood!
'Whiskey!' he said in a strangled voice, tottering to the bar. He pulled a threadbare dollar bill from his pocket, flapped it onto the mahogany.
The blackjack game at the back of the room had stopped. Harley was acutely conscious of the eyes of the players, the bartender and the tall, lean man leaning on the bar. All were watching him.
The bartender broke the spell. He reached for a bottle behind him without looking at it, placed it on the counter before Harley. He poured a glass of water from a jug, set it down with a shot glass beside the bottle.
'I could of told you that would happen,' he said casually. 'Only you wouldn't of believed me. You had to meet Hank for yourself before you'd believe he was there.'
Harley remembered his thirst and drained the glass of water, then poured himself a shot of the whiskey and swallowed it without waiting for the chaser to be refilled. The whiskey felt good going down, almost good enough to stop his internal shakes.
'What are you talking about?' he said finally. He twisted his body and leaned forward across the bar to partly hide the stains on his coat. The saloonkeeper laughed.
'Old Hank,' he said. 'I knowed who you was right away, even before Tom came back and told me where he'd took you. I knowed you was Zeb Harley's no-good nephew, come to take Harley Hall an' sell it before he was cold in the grave.'
The blackjack players were still watching him, Russell Harley saw. Only the lean man farther along the bar seemed to have dismissed him. He was pouring himself another drink, quite occupied with his task.
Harley flushed. 'Listen,' he said, 'I didn't come in here for advice. I wanted a drink. I'm paying for it. Keep your mouth out of this.'
The saloonkeeper shrugged. He turned his back and walked away to the blackjack table. After a couple of seconds one of the players turned, too, and threw a card down. The others followed suit.
Harley was just getting set to swallow his pride and talk to the saloonkeeper again - he seemed to know something about what Harley'd been through, and might be helpful - when the lean man tapped his shoulder. Harley whirled and almost dropped his glass. Absorbed and jumpy, he hadn't seen him come up.
'Young man,' said the lean one, 'My name's Nicholls. Come along with me, sir, and we'll talk this thing over. I think we may be of service to each other.'
Even the twelve-cylinder car Nicholls drove jounced like a hay-wagon over the sandy ruts leading to the place old Zeb had - laughingly - named 'Harley Hall.'
Russell Harley twisted his neck and stared at the heap of paraphernalia in the open rumble seat. 'I don't like it,' he complained. 'I never had anything to do with ghosts. How do I know this stuff'll work?'
Nicholls smiled. 'You'll have to take my word for it. I've had dealings with ghosts before. You could say that I might qualify as a ghost exterminator, if I chose.'
Harley growled. 'I still don't like it.'
Nicholls turned a sharp look on him. 'You like the prospect of owning Harley Hall, don't you? And looking for all the money your late uncle is supposed to have hidden around somewhere?' Harley shrugged. 'Certainly you do,' said Nicholls, returning his eyes to the road. 'And with good reason. The local reports put the figure pretty high, young man.'
'That's where you come in, I guess,' Harley said sullenly. 'I find the money - that I own anyhow - and give some of it to you. How much?'
'We'll discuss that later,' Nicholls said. He smiled absently as he looked ahead.
'We'll discuss it right now!'
The smile faded from Nicholls' face. 'No,' he said. 'We won't. I'm doing you a favor, young Harley. Remember that. In return - you'll do as I say, all the way!'
Harley digested that carefully, and it was not a pleasant meal. He waited a couple of seconds before he changed the subject.
'I was out here once when the old man was alive,' he said. 'He didn't say nothing about any ghost.'
'Perhaps he felt you might think him - well, peculiar,' Nicholls said. 'And perhaps you would have. When were you here?'
'Oh, a long time ago,' Harley said evasively. 'But I was here a whole day, and part of the night. The old man was crazy as a coot, but he didn't keep any ghosts in the attic.'
'This ghost was a friend of his,' Nicholls said. The gentleman in charge of the bar told you that, surely. Your late uncle was something of a recluse. He lived in this house a dozen miles from nowhere, came into town hardly ever, wouldn't let anyone get friendly with him. But he wasn't exactly a hermit. He had Hank for company."
'Fine company.'
Nicholls inclined his head seriously. 'Oh, I don't know,' he said. 'From all accounts, they got on well together. They played pinochle and chess - Hank's supposed to have been a great pinochle player. He was killed that way, according to the local reports. Caught somebody dealing from the bottom and shot it out with him. He lost. A bullet pierced his throat and he died quite bloodily.' He turned the wheel, putting his weight into the effort, and succeeded in twisting the car out of the ruts of the 'road,' sent it jouncing across unmarked sand to the old frame house to which they were going.
'That,' he finished as he pulled up before the porch, 'accounts for the blood that accompanies his apparition.'
Harley opened the door slowly and got out, looking uneasily at the battered old house. Nicholls cut the motor, got out and walked at once to the back of the car. "
'Come on,' he said, dragging things out of the compartment. 'Give me a hand with this. I'm not going to carry this stuff all by myself.'
Harley came around reluctantly, regarded the curious assortment of bundles of dried faggots, lengths of colored cord, chalk pencils, ugly little bunches of wilted weeds, bleached bones of small animals and a couple of less pleasant things without pleasure.
Pat. HISS. Pat. HISS -
'He's here!' Harley yelped. 'Listen! He's someplace around here watching us.'
'Ha!'
The laugh was deep, unpleasant and - bodiless. Harley looked around desperately for the tell-tale trickle of blood. And he found it; from the air it issued, just beside the car, sinking gracefully to the ground and sizzling, vanishing, there.
'I'm watching you, all right,' the voice said grimly. 'Russell, you worthless piece of corruption, I've got no more use for you than you used to have for me. Dead or alive, this is my land! I shared it with your uncle, you young scalawag, but I won't share it with you. Get out!'
Harley's knees weakened and he tottered dizzily to the rear bumper, sat on it. 'Nicholls -' he said confusedly.
'Oh, brace up,' Nicholls said with irritation. He tossed a ball of gaudy twine, red and green, with curious knots tied along it, to Harley. Then he confronted the trickle of blood and made a few brisk passes in the air before it. His lips were moving silently, Harley saw, but no words came out
There was a gasp and a chopped-off squawk from the source of the blood drops. Nicholls clapped his hands sharply, then turned to young Harley.
Take that cord you have in your hands and stretch it around the house,' he said. 'All the way around, and make sure it goes right across the middle of the doors and windows. It isn't much, but it'll hold him till we can get the good stuff set up.'
Harley nodded, then pointed a rigid finger at the drops of blood, now sizzling and fuming more angrily than before. 'What about that?' he managed to get out.
Nicholls grinned complacently. 'I'll hold him here till the cows come home,' he said, 'Get moving!'
Harley inadvertently inhaled a lungful of noxious white smoke and coughed till the tears rolled down his cheeks. When he recovered he looked at Nicholls, who was reading silently from a green leather book with dog-eared pages. He said, 'Can I stop stirring this now?'
Nicholls grimaced angrily and shook his head without looking at him. He went on reading, his lips contorting over syllables that were not in any language Harley had ever heard, then snapped the book shut and wiped his brow.
'Fine,' he said. 'So far, so good.' He stepped over to windward of the boiling pot Harley was stirring on the hob over the fireplace, peered down into it cautiously.
That's about done,' he said. 'Take it off the fire and let it cool a bit.'
Harley lifted it down, then squeezed his aching biceps with his left hand. The stuff was the consistency of sickly green fudge.
'Now what?' he asked.
Nicholls didn't answer. He looked up in mild surprise at the sudden squawk of triumph from outside, followed by the howling of a chill wind.
'Hank must be loose,' he said casually. 'He can't do us any harm, I think, but we'd better get a move on.' He rummaged in the dwindled pile of junk he'd brought from the car, extracted a paintbrush. 'Smear this stuff around all the windows and doors. All but the front door. For that I have something else.' He pointed to what seemed to be the front axle of an old Model-T. 'Leave that on the doorsill. Cold iron. You can just step over it, but Hank won't be able to pass it. It's been properly treated already with the very best thaumaturgy.'
'Step over it,' Harley repeated. 'What would I want to step over it for? He's out there.'
'He won't hurt you,' said Nicholls. 'You will carry an amulet with you - that one, there - that will keep him away. Probably he couldn't really hurt you anyhow, being a low-order ghost who can't materialize to any great density. But just to take no chances, carry the amulet and don't stay out too long. It won't hold him off forever, not for more than half an hour. If you ever have to go out and stay for any length of time, tie that bundle of herbs around your neck.' Nicholls smiled. 'That's only for emergencies, though. It works on the asafoe-tida principle. Ghosts can't come anywhere near it - but you won't like it much yourself. It has - ah - a rather definite odor.'
He leaned gingerly over the pot again, sniffing. He sneezed.
'Well, that's cool enough,' he said. 'Before it hardens, get moving. Start spreading the stuff upstairs - and make sure you don't miss any windows.'
'What are you going to do?'
'I,' said Nicholls sharply, 'will be here. Start.'
But he wasn't. When Harley finished his disagreeable task and came down, he called Nicholls' name, but the man was gone. Harley stepped to the door and looked out; the car was gone, too.
He shrugged. 'Oh, well,' he said, and began taking the dust-cloths off the furniture.
Somewhere within the cold, legal mind of Lawyer Turnbull, he weighed the comparative likeness of nightmare and insanity.
He stared at the plush chair facing him, noted with distinct uneasiness how the strangely weightless, strangely sourceless trickle of redness disappeared as it hit the floor, but left long, mud-ochre streaks matted on the upholstery. The sound was unpleasant, too; Pat. HISS. Pat. HISS -
The voice continued impatiently, 'Damn your human stupidity! I may be a ghost, but heaven knows I'm not trying to haunt you. Friend, you're not that important to me. Get this -I'm here on business.'
Turnbull learned that you cannot wet dry lips with a dehydrated tongue. 'Legal business?'
'Sure. The fact that I was once killed by violence, and have to continue my existence on the astral plane, doesn't mean I've lost my legal rights. Does it?'
The lawyer shook his head in bafflement. He said, This would be easier on me if you weren't invisible. Can't you do something about it?'
There was a short pause. 'Well, I could materialize for a minute,' the voice said. 'It's hard work - damn hard, for me. There are a lot of us astral entities that can do it easy as falling out of bed, but - Well, if I have to I shall try to do it once.'
There was a shimmering in the air above the armchair, and a milky, thin smoke condensed into an intangible seated figure. Turnbull took no delight in noting that, through the figure, the outlines of the chair were still hazily visible. The figure thickened. Just as the features took form - just as Turnbull's bulging eyes made out a prominent hooked nose and a crisp beard - it thinned and exploded with a soft pop.
The voice said weakly, 'I didn't think I was that bad. I'm way out of practice. I guess that's the first daylight materialization I've made in seventy-five years.'
The lawyer adjusted his rimless glasses and coughed. Hell's binges, he thought, the worst thing about this is that I'm believing it!
'Oh, well,' he said aloud. Then he hurried on before the visitor could take offense: 'Just what did you want? I'm just a small-town laywer, you know. My business is fairly routine -'
'I know all about your business,' the voice said. 'You can handle my case - it's a land affair. I want to sue Russell Har-ley.'
'Harley?' Turnbull fingered his cheeks. 'Any relation to Zeb Harley?'
'His nephew - and his heir, too.'
Turnbull nodded. 'Yes, I remember now. My wife's folks live in Rebel Butte, and I've been there. Quite a coincidence you should come to me -'
The voice laughed. 'It was no coincidence,' it said softly.
'Oh.' Turnbull was silent for a second. Then, 'I see,' he said. He cast a shrewd glance at the chair. 'Lawsuits cost money, Mr. - I don't think you mentioned your name?'
'Hank Jenkins,' the voice prompted. 'I know that. Would -let's see. Would six hundred and fifty dollars be sufficient?'
Turnbull swallowed. 'I think so,' he said in a relatively unemotional tone - relative to what he was thinking.
'Then suppose we call that your retainer. I happen to have cached a considerable sum in gold when I was - that is to say, before I became an astral entity. I'm quite certain it hasn't been disturbed. You will have to call it treasure trove, I guess, and give half of it to the state, but there's thirteen hundred dollars altogether.'
Turnbull nodded judiciously. 'Assuming we can locate your trove,' he said, 'I think that would be quite satisfactory.' He leaned back in his chair and looked legal. His aplomb had returned.
And half an hour later he said slowly, 'I'll take your case.'
Judge Lawrence Gimbel had always liked his job before. But his thirteen honorable years on the bench lost their flavor for him as he grimaced wearily and reached for his gavel. This case was far too confusing for his taste.
The clerk made his speech, and the packed courtroom sat down en masse. Gimbel held a hand briefly to his eyes before he spoke.
'Is the counsel for the plaintiff ready?'
'I am, your honor.' Turnbull, alone at his table, rose and bowed.
The counsel for the defendant?'
'Ready, your honor!' Fred Wilson snapped. He looked with a hard flicker of interest at Turnbull and his solitary table, then leaned over and whispered in Russell Harley's ear. The youth nodded glumly, then shrugged.
Gimbel said, 'I understand the attorneys for both sides have waived jury trial in this case of Henry Jenkins versus Russell Joseph Harley.'
Both lawyers nodded. Gimbel continued, 'In view of the unusual nature of this case, I imagine it will prove necessary to conduct it with a certain amount of informality. The sole purpose of this court is to arrive at the true facts at issue, and to deliver a verdict in accord with the laws pertaining to these facts. I will not stand on ceremony. Nevertheless, I will not tolerate any disturbances or unnecessary irregularities. The spectators will kindly remember that they are here on privilege. Any demonstration will result in the clearing of the court.'
He looked severely at the white faces that gleamed unintel-ligently up at him. He suppressed a sigh as he said, 'The counsel for the plaintiff will begin.'
Turnbull rose quickly to his feet, faced the judge.
'Your honor,' he said, 'we propose to show that my client, Henry Jenkins, has been deprived of his just rights by the defendant. Mr. Jenkins, by virtue of a sustained residence of more than twenty years in the house located on Route 22, eight miles north of the town of Rebel Butte, with the full knowledge of its legal owner, has acquired certain rights. In legal terminology we define these as the rights of adverse possession. The layman would call them common-law rights - squatters' rights.'
Gimbel folded his hands and tried to relax. Squatters' rights - for a ghost! He sighed, but listened attentively as Turnbull went on.
'Upon the death of Sebulon Harley, the owner of the house involved - it is better known, perhaps, as Harley Hall - the defendant inherited title to the property. We do not question his right to it. But my client has an equity in Harley Hall; the right to free and full existence. The defendant has forcefully evicted my client, by means which have caused my client great mental distress, and have even endangered his very existence.'
Gimbel nodded. If the case only had a precedent somewhereÖ But it hadn't; he remembered grimly the hours he'd
spent thumbing through all sorts of unlikely law books, looking for anything that might bear on the case. It had been his better judgment that he throw the case out of court outright - a judge couldn't afford to have himself laughed at, not if he were ambitious. And public laughter was about the only certainty there was to this case. But Wilson had put up such a fight that the judge's temper had taken over. He never did like Wilson, anyhow.
'You may proceed with your witnesses,' he said.
Turnbull nodded. To the clerk he said, 'Call Henry Jenkins to the stand.'
Wilson was on his feet before the clerk opened his mouth.
'Objection!' he bellowed. 'The so-called Henry Jenkins cannot qualify as a witness!'
'Why not?' demanded Turnbull.
'Because he's dead!'
The judge clutched his gavel with one hand, forehead with the other. He banged on the desk to quieten the courtroom.
Turnbull stood there, smiling. 'Naturally,' he said, 'you'll have proof of that statement.'
Wilson snarled. 'Certainly.' He referred to his brief. 'The so-called Henry Jenkins is the ghost, spirit or specter of one Hank Jenkins, who prospected for gold in this territory a century ago. He was killed by a bullet through the throat from the gun of one Long Tom Cooper, and was declared legally dead on September 14, 1850. Cooper was hanged for his murder. No matter what hocus-pocus you produce for evidence to the contrary now, that status of legal death remains completely valid.'
'What evidence have you of the identity of my client with this Hank Jenkins?' Turnbull asked grimly.
'Do you deny it?'
Turnbull shrugged. 'I deny nothing. I'm not being cross-examined. Furthermore, the sole prerequisite of a witness is that he understand the value of an oath. Henry Jenkins was tested by John Quincy Fitzjames, professor of psychology at the University of Southern California. The results - I have Dr. Fitzjames' sworn statement of them here, which I will introduce as an exhibit - show clearly that my client's intelligence quotient is well above normal, and that a psychiatric examination discloses no important aberrations which would injure his validity as a witness. I insist that my client be allowed to testify on his own behalf.'
'But he's dead!' squawked Wilson. 'He's invisible right now!'
'My client,' said Turnbull stiffly, 'is not present just now. Undoubtedly that accounts for what you term his invisibility.' He paused for the appreciative murmur that swept through the court. Things were breaking perfectly, he thought, smiling. 'I have here another affidavit,' he said. 'It is signed by Elihu James and Terence MacRae, who respectively head the departments of physics and biology at the same university. It startes that my client exhibits all the vital phenomena of life. I am prepared to call all three of my expert witnesses to the stand, if necessary.'
Wilson scowled but said nothing, Judge Gimbel leaned forward.
'I don't see how it is possible for me to refuse the plaintiff the right to testify,' he said. 'If the three experts who prepared these reports will testify on the stand to the facts contained in them, Henry Jenkins may then take the stand.'
Wilson sat down heavily. The three experts spoke briefly -and dryly. Wilson put them through only the most formal of cross-examinations.
The judge declared a brief recess. In the corridor outside, Wilson and his client lit cigarettes and looked unsympathetic-ally at each other.
'I feel like a fool,' said Russell Harley. 'Bringing suit against a ghost.'
'The ghost brought the suit,' Wilson reminded him. 'If only we'd been able to hold fire for a couple more weeks, till another judge came on the bench, I could've got this thing thrown right out of court.'
'Well, why couldn't we wait?' 'Because you were in such a damn hurry!' Wilson said. 'You and that idiot Nicholls - so confident that it would never come to trial.'
Harley shrugged, and thought unhappily of their failure in completely exorcising the ghost of Hank Jenkins. That had been a mess. Jenkins had somehow escaped from the charmed circle they'd drawn around him, in which they'd hoped to keep him till the trial was forfeited by non-appearance.
'That's another thing,' said Wilson. 'Where is Nicholls?'
Harley shrugged again. 'I dunno. The last I saw of him was in your office. He came around to see me right after the deputy slapped the show-cause order on me at the house. He brought me down, to you - said you'd been recommended to him. Then you and him and I talked about the case for a while. He went out, after he lent me a little money to help meet your retainer. Haven't seen him since.'
'I'd like to know who recommended me to him,' Wilson said grimly. 'I don't think he'd ever recommend anybody else. I don't like this case - and I don't much like you.'
Harley growled but said nothing. He flung his cigarette away. It tasted of the garbage that hung around his neck -everything did. Nicholls had told no lies when he said Harley wouldn't much like the bundle of herbs that would ward off the ghost of old Jenkins. They smelled.
The court clerk was in the corridor, bawling something, and people were beginning to trickle back in. Harley and his attorney went with them.
When the trial had been resumed, the clerk said, 'Henry Jenkins!'
Wilson was on his feet at once. He opened the door of the judge's chamber, said something in a low tone. Then he stepped back, as if to let someone through.
Pat. HISS. Pat. HISS -
There was a concerted gasp from the spectators as the weirdly appearing trickle of blood moved slowly across the open space to the witness chair. This was the ghost - the plaintiff in the most eminently absurd case in the history of jurisprudence.
'All right, Hank,' Turnbull whispered. 'You'll have to materialize long enough to let the clerk swear you in.'
The clerk drew back nervously at the pillar of milky fog that appeared before him, vaguely humanoid in shape. A phantom hand, half transparent, reached out to touch the Bible. The clerk's voice shook as he administered the oath, and heard the response come from the heart of the cloudpillar.
The haze drifted into the witness chair, bent curiously at about hip-height, and popped into nothingness.
The judge banged his gavel wildly. The buzz of alarm that had arisen from the spectators died out.
Til warn you again,' he declared, 'that unruliness will not be tolerated. The counsel for the plaintiff may proceed.'
Turnbull walked to the witness chair and addressed its emptiness.
'Your name?'
'My name is Henry Jenkins.'
'Your occupation?'
There was a slight pause. 'I have none. I guess you'd say I'm retired.'
'Mr. Jenkins, just what connections have you with the building referred to as Harley Hall?'
'I have occupied it for ninety years.'
'During this time, did you come to know the late Zebulon Harley, owner of the Hall?"
'I knew Zeb quite well.'
Turnbull nodded. 'When did you make his acquaintance?' he asked.
'In the spring of 1907. Zeb had just lost his wife. After that, you see, he made Harley Hall his year-round home. He became - well, more or less of a hermit. Before that we had never met, since he was only seldom at the Hall. But we became friendly then.'
'How long did this friendship last?'
'Until he died last fall. I was with him when he died. I still have a few keepsakes he left me then.' There was a distinct nostalgic sigh from the witness chair, which by now was liberally spattered with muddy red liquid. The falling drops seemed to hesitate for a second, and their sizzling noise was muted as with a strong emotion.
Turnbull went on, 'Your relations with" him were good, then?'
'I'd call them excellent,' the emptiness replied firmly. 'Every night we sat up together. When we didn't play pinochle or chess or cribbage, we just sat and talked over the news of the day. I still have the book we used to keep records of the chess and pinochle games. Zeb made the entries himself, in his own handwriting.'
Turnbull abandoned the witness for a moment. He faced the judge with a smile. 'I offer in evidence,' he said, 'the book mentioned. Also a ring given to the plaintiff by the late Mr. Harley, and a copy of the plays of Gilbert and Sullivan. On the flyleaf of this book is inscribed, "To Old Hank," in Harley's own hand.'
He turned again to the empty, blood-leaking witness chair.
He said, 'In all your years of association, did Zebulon Harley ever ask you to leave, or to pay rent?' 'Of course not. Not Zeb!'
Turnbull nodded. 'Very good,' he said. 'Now, just one or two more questions. Will you tell in your own words what occurred, after the death of Zebulon Harley, that caused you to bring this suit?'
'Well, in January young Harley -'
'You mean Russell Joseph Harley, the defendant?'
'Yes. He arrived at Harley Hall on January fifth. I asked him to leave, which he did. On the next day he returned with another man. They placed a talisman upon the threshold of the main entrance, and soon after sealed every threshold and windowsill in the Hall with a substance which is noxious to me. These activities were accompanied by several of the most deadly spells in the Ars Magicorum. He further added an Exclusion Circle with a radius of a little over a mile, entirely surrounding the Hall.'
'I see,' the lawyer said. 'Will you explain to the court the effects of these activities?'
'Well,' the voice said thoughtfully, 'it's a little hard to put in words. I can't pass the Circle without a great expenditure of energy. Even if I did I couldn't enter the building because of the talisman and the seals.'
'Could you enter by air? Through a chimney, perhaps?'
'No. The Exclusion Circle is really a sphere. I'm pretty sure the effort would destroy me.'
'In effect, then, you are entirely barred from the house you have occupied for ninety years, due to the wilful acts of Russell Joseph Harley, the defendant, and an unnamed accomplice of his.'
'That is correct.'
Turnbull beamed. 'Thank you. That's all.'
He turned to Wilson, whose face had been a study in dour-ness throughout the entire examination. 'Your witness,' he said.
Wilson snapped to his feet and strode to the witness chair.
He said belligerently, 'You say your name is Henry Jenkins?'
'Yes.1
'That is your name now, you mean to say. What was your name before?'
'Before?' There was surprise in the voice that emanated from above the trickling blood-drops. 'Before when?"
Wilson scowled. 'Don't pretend ignorance,' he said sharply. 'Before you died, of course.'
'Objection!' Turnbull was on his feet, glaring at Wilson. The counsel for the defense has no right to speak of some hypothetical death of my client!'
Gimbel raised a hand wearily and cut off the words that were forming on Wilson 's lips. 'Objection sustained,' he said. 'No evidence has been presented to identify the plaintiff as the prospector who was killed in 1850 - or anyone else.'
Wilson 's mouth twisted into a sour grimace. He continued on a lower key.
'You say, Mr. Jenkins, that you occupied Harley Hall for ninety years.'
'Ninety-two years next month. The Hall wasn't built - in its present form, anyhow - until 1876, but I occupied the house that stood on the site previously.'
'What did you do before then?'
'Before then?' The voice paused, then said doubtfully, 'I don't remember.'
'You're under oath!' Wilson flared.
The voice got firmer. 'Ninety years is a long time,' it said. 'I don't remember.'
Tret's see if I can't refresh your memory. Is it true that ninety-one years ago, in the very year in which you claim to have begun your occupancy of Harley Hall, Hank Jenkins was killed in a gun duel?'
'That may be true, if you say so. I don't remember.'
'Do you remember that the shooting occurred not fifty feet from the present site of Harley Hall?'
'It may be.'
'Well, then,' Wilson thundered, 'is it not a fact that when Hank Jenkins died by violence his ghost assumed existence? That it was then doomed to haunt the site of its slaying throughout eternity?'
The voice said evenly, 'I have no knowledge of that.'
'Do you deny that it is well known throughout that section that the ghost of Hank Jenkins haunts Harley Hall?'
'Objection!' shouted Turnbull. 'Popular opinion is not evidence.'
'Objection sustained. Strike the question from the record.'
Wilson, badgered, lost his control. In a dangerously uneven
voice, he said, 'Perjury is a criminal offense. Mr. Jenkins, do you deny that you are the ghost of Hank Jenkins?'
The tone was surprised. 'Why, certainly.'
'You are a ghost, aren't you?'
Stiffly, 'I'm an entity on the astral plane.'
'That, I believe, is what is called a ghost?'
'I can't help what it's called. I've heard you called a lot of things. Is that proof?'
There was a surge of laughter from the audience. Gimbel slammel his gavel down on the bench.
'The witness,' he said, 'will confine himself to answering questions.'
Wilson bellowed, 'In spite of what you say, it's true, isn't it, that you are merely the spirit of a human being who had died through violence?'
The voice from above the blood drops retorted, 'I repeat that I am an entity of the astral plane. I am not aware that I was ever a human being.'
The lawyer turned an exasperated face to the bench.
'Your honor,' he said, 'I ask that you instruct the witness to cease playing verbal hide-and-seek. It is quite evident that the witness is a ghost, and that he is therefore the relict of some human being, ipso facto. Circumstantial evidence is strong that he is the ghost of the Hank Jenkins who was killed in 1850. But this is a non-essential point. What is definite is that he is the ghost of someone who is dead, and hence is unqualified to act as witness! I demand his testimony be stricken from the record!'
Tumbull spoke up at once. 'Will the counsel for the defense quote his authority for branding my client a ghost - in the face of my client's repeated declaration that he is an entity of the astral plane? What is the legal definition of a ghost?'
Judge Gimbel smiled. 'Counsel for the defense will proceed with the cross-examination,' he said.
Wilson 's face flushed dark purple. He mopped his brow with a large bandanna, then glared at the dropping, sizzling trickle of blood.
'Whatever you are,' he said, 'answer me this question. Can you pass through a wall?'
'Why, yes. Certainly.' There was a definite note of surprise in the voice from nowhere. 'But it isn't as easy as some people think. It definitely requires a lot of effort.'
'Never mind that. You can do it?'
'Yes.'
'Could you be bound by any physical means? Would handcuffs hold you? Or ropes, chains, prison walls, a hermetically sealed steel chest?'
Jenkins had no chance to answer. Turnbull, scenting danger, cut in hastily. 'I object to this line of questioning. It is entirely irrelevant.'
'On the contrary,' Wilson cried loudly, 'it bears strongly on the qualifications of the so-called Henry Jenkins as a witness! I demand that he answer the question.'
Judge Gimbel said, 'Objection overruled. Witness will answer the question.'
The voice from the chair said superciliously, 'I don't mind answering. Physical barriers mean nothing to me, by and large.'
The counsel for the defense drew himself up triumphantly.
'Very good,' he said with satisfaction. 'Very good.' Then to the judge, the words coming sharp and fast, 'I claim, your honor, that the so-called Henry Jenkins has no legal status as a witness in court. There is clearly no value in understanding the nature of an oath if a violation of the oath can bring no punishment in its wake. The statements of a man who can perjure himself freely have no worth. I demand they be stricken from the record!'
Turnbull was at the judge's bench in two strides.
'I had anticipated that, your honor,' he said quickly. 'From the very nature of the case; however, it is clear that my client can be very definitely restricted in his movements - spells, pentagrams, talismans, amulets, Exclusion Circles and whatnot. I have here - which I am prepared to deliver to the bailiff of the court - a list of the various methods of confining an astral entity to a restricted area for periods ranging from a few moments to all eternity. Moreover, I have also signed a bond for five thousand dollars, prior to the beginning of the trial, which I stand ready to forfeit should my client be confined and make his escape, if found guilty of any misfeasance as a witness.'
Gimbel's face, which had looked startled for a second, slowly cleared. He nodded. 'The court is satisfied with the statement of the counsel for the plaintiff,' he declared. 'There seems no doubt that the plaintiff can be penalized for any mis-statements, and the motion of the defense is denied.'
Wilson looked choleric, but shrugged. 'All right,' he said. That will be all.'
'You may step down, Mr. Jenkins,' Gimbel directed, and watched in fascinatiori as the blood-dripping column rose and floated over the floor, along the corridor, out the door.
Turnbull approached the judge's bench again. He said, 'I would like to place in evidence these notes, the diary of the late Zebuloh Harley. It was presented to my client by Harley himself last fall. I call particular attention to the entry for April sixth, nineteen seventeen, in which he mentions the entrance of the United States into the First World War, and records the results of a series of eleven pinochle games played with a personage identified as "Old Hank." With the court's permission, I will read the entry for that day, and also various other entries for the next four years. Please note the references to someone known variously as "Jenkins," "Hank Jenkins" and - in one extremely significant passage - "Old Invisible."'
Wilson stewed silently during the slow reading of Harley's diary. There was anger on his face, but he paid close attention, and when the reading was over he leaped to his feet.
'I would like to know,' he asked, 'if the counsel for the plaintiff is in possession of any diaries after nineteen twenty?'
Turnbull shook his head. 'Harley apparently never kept a diary, except during the four years represented in this.'
Then I demand that the court refuse to admit this diary as evidence on two counts,' Wilson said. He raised two fingers to tick off the points. 'In the first place, the evidence presented is frivolous. The few vague and unsatisfactory references to Jenkins nowhere specifically describe him as what he is - ghost, astral entity or what you will. Second, the evidence, even were the first point overlooked, concerns only the years up to nineteen twenty-one. The case concerns itself only with the supposed occupation of Harley Hall by the so-called Jenkins in the last twenty years - since 'twenty-one. Clearly, the evidence is therefore irrelevant.'
Gimbel looked at Turnbull, who smiled calmly.
'The reference to "Old Invisible" is far from vague,' he said. 'It is a definite indication of the astral character of my client. Furthermore, evidence as to the friendship of my client with the late Mr. Zebulon Harley before nineteen twenty-one is entirely relevant, as such a friendship, once established, would naturally be presumed to have continued indefinitely. Unless of course, the defense is able to present evidence to the contrary.'
Judge Gimbel said, 'The diary is admitted as evidence.'
Turnbull said, 'I rest my case.'
There was a buzz of conversation in the courtroom while the judge looked over the diary, and then handed it to the clerk to be marked and entered.
Gimbel said, 'The defense may open its case.'
Wilson rose. To the clerk he said, 'Russell Joseph Harley.'
But young Harley was recalcitrant. 'Nix,' he said, on his feet, pointing at the witness chair. 'That thing's got blood all over it! You don't expect me to sit down in that large puddle of blood, do you?'
Judge Gimbel leaned over to look at the chair. The drip-drop trickle of blood from the apparition who'd been testifying had left its mark. Muddy brown all down the front of the chair. Gimbel found himself wondering how the ghost managed to replenish its supply of the fluid, but gave it up.
'I see your point,' he said. 'Well, it's getting a bit late anyhow. The clerk will take away the present witness chair and replace it. In the interim, I declare the court recessed till tomorrow morning at ten o'clock.'
Russell Harley noticed how the elevator boy's back registered repulsion and disapproval, and scowled. He was not a popular guest in the hotel, he knew well. Where he made his mistake, though, was in thinking that the noxious bundle of herbs about his neck was the cause of it. His odious personality had a lot to do with the chilly attitude of the management and his fellow guests.
He made his way to the bar, ignoring the heads that turned in surprise to follow the reeking comet-tail of his passage. He entered the red-leather-and-chromium drinking room, and stared about for Lawyer Wilson.
And blinked in surprise when he saw him. Wilson wasn't alone. In the booth with him was a tall, dark figure, with his back to Harley. The back alone was plenty fpr recognition. Nicholls!
Wilson had seen him. 'Hello, Harley,' he said, all smiles and affability in the presence of the man with the money. 'Come on and sit down. Mr. Nicholls dropped in on me a little while ago, so I brought him over.'
'Hello,' Harley said glumly, and Nicholls nodded. The muscles of his cheeks pulsed, and he seemed under a strain, strangely uncomfortable in Harley's presence. Still there was a twinkle in the look he gave young Harley, and.his voice was friendly enough - though supercilious - as he said:
'Hello, Harley. How is the trial going?'
'Ask him,' said Harley, pointing a thumb at Wilson as he slid his knees under the booth's table and sat down. 'He's the lawyer. He's supposed to know these things.'
'Doesn't he?'
Harley shrugged and craned his neck for the waitress. 'Oh, I guess soÖ Rye and water!' He watched the girl appreciatively as she nodded and went off to the bar, then turned his attention back to Nicholls. 'The trouble is,' he said, ' Wilson may think he knows, but I think he's all wet.'
Wilson frowned. 'Do you imply-' he began, but Nicholls put up a hand.
'Let's not bicker,' said Nicholls. 'Suppose you answer my question. I have a stake in this, and I want to know. How's the trial going?'
Wilson put on his most open-faced expressionÖ 'Frankly,' he said, 'not too well. I'm afraid the judge is on the other side. If you'd listened to me and stalled till another judge came along-'
'I had no time to stall,' said Nicholls. 'I have to be elsewhere within a few days. Even now, I should be on my way. Do you think we might lose the case?'
Harley laughed sharply. As Wilson glared at him he took his drink from the waitress' tray and swallowed it. The smile remained on his face as he listened to Wilson say smoothly:
'There is a good deal of danger, yes.'
'Hum.' Nicholls looked interestedly at his fingernails. 'Perhaps I chose the wrong lawyer.'
'Sure you did.' Harley waved at the waitress, ordered another drink. You want to know what else I think? I think you picked the wrong client, spelled s-t-o-o-g-e. I'm getting sick of this. This damn thing around my neck smells bad. How do I know it's any good, anyhow? Far as I can see, it just smells bad, and that's all.'
'It works,' Nicholls said succinctly. 'I wouldn't advise you to go without it. The late Hank Jenkins is not a very strong ghost - a strong one would tear you apart and chew up your herbs for dessert - but without the protection of what you wear about your neck, you would become a very uncomfortable human as soon as Jenkins heard you'd stopped wearing it.',
He put down the glass of red wine he'd been inhaling without drinking, looked intently at Wilson. 'I've put up the money in this,' he said. 'I had hoped you'd be able to handle the legal end. I see I'll have to do more. Now listen intently, because I have no intention of repeating this. There's an angle to this case that's got right by your blunted legal acumen. Jenkins claims to be an astral entity, which he undoubtedly is. Now, instead of trying to prove him a ghost, and legally dead, and therefore unfit to testify, which you have been doing, suppose you do thisÖ'
He went on to speak rapidly and to the point.
And when he left them a bit later, and Wilson took Harley ï up to his room and poured him into bed, the lawyer felt happy for the first time in days.
Russell Joseph Harley, a little hung over and a lot nervous, was called to the stand as first witness in his own behalf.
Wilson said, 'Your name?'
'Russell Joseph Harley.'
'You are the nephew of the late Zebulon Harley, who bequeathed the residence known as Harley Hall to you?'
'Yes.'
Wilson turned to the bench. 'I offer this copy of the late Mr. Zebulon Harley's will in evidence. All his possessions are left to his nephew and only living kin, the defendant.'
Turnbull spoke from his desk. The plaintiff in no way disputes the defendant's equity in Harley Hall.'
Wilson continued, 'You passed part of your childhood in Harley Hall, did you not, and visited it as a grown man on occasion?'
'Yes.'
'At any time, has anything in the shape of a ghost, specter or astral entity manifested itself to you in Harley Hall?'
'No. I'd remember it.'
'Did your late uncle ever mention any such manifestation to you?'
'Him? No.'
That's all.'
Turnbull came up for the cross-examination.
'When, Mr. Harley, did you last see your uncle before his death?'
'It was in nineteen thirtyreight. In September, some time -around the tenth or eleventh of the month.'
'How long a time did you spend with him?'
Harley flushed unaccountably. 'Ah - just one day,' he said.
'When before that did you see him?"
'Well, not since I was quite young. My parents moved to Pennsylvania in nineteen twenty.'
'And since then - except for that one-day visit in nineteen thirty-eight - has any communication passed between your uncle and yourself?'
'No, I guess not. He was a rather queer duck - solitary. A little bit balmy, I think.'
'Well, you're a loving nephew. But in view of what you've just said, does it sound surprising that your uncle never told you of Mr. Jenkins? He never had much chance to, did he?'
'He had a chance in nineteen thirty-eight, but he didn't.' Harley said defiantly.
Turnbull shrugged. 'I'm finished,' he said.
Gimbel began to look bored. He had anticipated something more in the way of fireworks. He said, 'Has the defense any further witnesses?'
Wilson smiled grimly. 'Yes, your honor,' he said. This was his big moment, and he smiled again as he said gently, 'I would like to call Mr. Henry Jenkins to the stand.'
In the amazed silence that followed, Judge Gimbel leaned forward. 'You mean you wish to call the plaintiff as a witness for the defense?'
Serenely, 'Yes, your honor.'
Gimbel grimaced, 'Call Henry Jenkins,' he said wearily to the clerk, and sank back in his chair.
Turnbull was looking alarmed. He bit his lip, trying to decide whether to object to this astonishing procedure, but finally shrugged as the clerk bawled out the ghost's name.
Turnbull sped down the corridor, out the door. His voice was heard in the anteroom, then he returned more slowly. Behind him came the trickle of blood drops: Pat. HISS. Pat. HISS -
'One moment,' said Gimbel, coming to life again. 'I have no objection to your testifying, Mr. Jenkins, but the State should not be subjected to the needless expense of reupholster-ing its witness chair every time you do. Bailiff, find some sort of a rug or something to throw over the chair before Mr. Jenkins is sworn in.'
A tarpaulin was hurriedly procured and adjusted to the chair; Jenkins materialized long enough to be sworn in, then sat.
Tell me, Mr. Jenkins,' he said, 'just how many "astral entities" - I believe that is what you call yourself - are there?'
'I have no way of knowing. Many billions.'
'As many, in other words, as there have been human beings to die by violence?'
Turnbull rose to his feet in sudden agitation, but the ghost neatly evaded the trap. 'I don't know. I only know there are billions.'
The lawyer's cat-who-ate-canary smile remained undimmed.
'And all these billions are constantly about us, everywhere, only remaining invisible. Is that it?'
'Oh, no. Very few remain on Earth. Of course, still fewer have anything to do with humans. Most humans are quite boring to us.'
'Well, how many would you say are on Earth? A hundred thousand?'
'Even more, maybe. But that's a good guess.'
Turnbull interrupted suddenly. 'I would like to know the significance of these questions. I object to this whole line of questioning as being totally irrelevant.'
Wilson was a study in legal dignity. He retorted, 'I am trying to elicijt some facts of major value, your honor. This may change the entire character of the case. I ask your patience for a moment or two.'
'Counsel for the defense may continue,' Gimbel said curtly.
Wilson showed his canines in a grin. He continued to the blood-dripping before him. 'Now, the contention of your counsel is that the late Mr. Harley allowed an "astral entity" to occupy his home for twenty years or more, with his full knowledge and consent. That strikes me as being entirely improbable, but shall we for the moment assume it to be the case?' 'Certainly! It's the truth.'
'Then tell me, Mr. Jenkins, have you fingers?'
'Have I-what?'
'You heard me!' Wilson snapped. 'Have you fingers, flesh-and-blood fingers, capable of making an imprint?'
'Why, no. I-'
Wilson rushed on. 'Or have you a photograph of yourself -or specimens of your handwriting - or any sort of material identification? Have you any of these?'
The voice was definitely querulous. 'What do you mean?'
Wilson 's voice became harsh, menacing. 'I mean, can you prove that you are the astral entity alleged to have occupied Zebulon Harley's home. Was it you - or was it another of the featureless, faceless, intangible unknowns - one of the hundreds of thousands of them that, by your own admission, are all over the face of the earth, rambling where they choose, not halted by any locks or bars? Can you prove that you are anyone in particular?'
'Your honor!' Turnbull's voice was almost a shriek as he found his feet at last. 'My client's identity was never in question!'
'It is now!' roared Wilson. 'The opposing counsel has presented a personage whom he styles "Henry Jenkins." Who is this Jenkins? What is he? Is he even an individual - or a corporate aggregation of these mysterious "astral entities" which we are to believe are everywhere, but which we never see? If he is an individual, is he the individual? And how can we know that, even if he says he is? Let him produce evidence - photographs, a birth certificate, fingerprints. Let him bring in identifying witnesses who have known both ghosts, and are prepared to swear that these ghosts are the same ghost. Failing this, there is no case! Your honor, I demand the court declare an immediate judgment in favor of the defendant!'
Judge Gimbel stared at Turnbull. 'Have you anything to say?' he asked. 'The argument of the defense would seem to have every merit with it. Unless you can produce some sort of evidence as to the identity of your client, I have no alternative but to find for the defense.'
For a moment there was a silent tableau. Wilson triumphant, Turnbull furiously frustrated.
How could you identify a ghost?
And then came the quietly amused voice from the witness chair.
'This thing has gone far enough,' it said above the sizzle and splatter of its own leaking blood. 'I believe I can present proof that will satisfy the court.'
Wilson 's face fell with express-elevator speed. Turnbull held his breath, afraid to hope.
Judge Gimbel said, 'You are under oath. Proceed.'
There was no other sound in the courtroom as the voice said, 'Mr. Harley, here, spoke of a visit to his uncle in nineteen thirty-eight. I can vouch for that. They spent a night and a day together. They weren't alone. I was there.'
No one was watching Russell Harley, or they might have seen the sudden sick pallor that passed over his face.
The voice, relentless, went on. 'Perhaps I shouldn't have eavesdropped as I did, but old Zeb never had any secrets from me anyhow. I listened to what they talked about. Young Harley was working for a bank in Philadelphia at the time. His first big job. He needed money, and needed it bad. There was a shortage in his department. A woman named Sally -'
'Hold on!' Wilson yelled. 'This has nothing to do with your identification of yourself. Keep to the point!'
But Turnbull had begun to comprehend. He was shouting, too, almost too excited to be coherent. 'Your honor, my client must be allowed to speak. If he shows knowledge of an intimate conversation between the late Mr. Harley and the defendant, it would be certain proof that he enjoyed the late Mr. Harley's confidence, and thus, Q.E.D., that he is no other than the astral entity who occupied Harley Hall for so long!'
Gimbel nodded sharply. 'Let me remind counsel for the defense that this is his own witness. Mr. Jenkins, continue.'
The voice began again, 'As I was saying, the woman's name -'
'Shut up, damn you!' Harley yelled. He sprang upright, turned beseechingly toward the judge. 'He is twisting it! Make him stop! Sure, I knew my uncle had a ghost. He's it, all right, curse his black soul! He can have the house if he wants it - I'll clear out. I'll clear out of the whole damned state!'
He broke off into babbling and turned about wildly. Only the intervention of a marshal kept him from hurtling out of the courtroom.
Banging of the gavel and hard work by the court clerk and his staff restored order in the courtroom. When the room had returned almost to normalcy, Judge Gimbel, perspiring and annoyed, said, 'As far as I am concerned, identification of the witness is complete. Has the defense any further evidence to present?'
Wilson shrugged morosely. 'No, your honor.'
'Counsel for the plaintiff?'
'Nothing, your honor. I rest my case.'
Gimbel plowed a hand through his sparse hair and blinked. 'In that case,' he said, 'I find for the plaintiff. An order is entered hereby that the defendant, Russell Joseph Harley, shall remove from the premises of Harley Hall all spells, pentagrams, talismans and other means of exorcism employed; that he shall cease and desist from making any attempts, of whatever nature, to evict the tenant in the future; and that Henry Jenkins, the plaintiff, shall be permitted the full use and occupancy of the premises designated as Harley Hall for the full term of his natural - ah - existence.' The gavel banged. 'The case is closed.'
'Don't take it so hard,' said a mild voice behind Russell Harley. He whirled surlily. Nicholls was coming up the street after him from the courthouse, Wilson in tow.
Nicholls said, 'You lost the case, but you've still got your life. Let me buy you a drink. In here, perhaps.'
He herded them into a cocktail lounge, sat them down before they had a chance to object. He glanced at his expensive wrist watch. 'I have a few minutes,' he said. 'Then I really must be off. It's urgent.'
He hailed a barman, ordered for all. Then he looked at young Harley and smiled broadly as he dropped a bill on the counter to pay for the drinks.
'Harley,' he said, 'I have a motto that you would do well to remember at times like these. I'll make you a present of it, if you like.'
'What is it?'
' "The worst is yet to come."'
Harley snarled and swallowed his drink without replying. Wilson said, 'What gets me is, why didn't they come to us before the trial with that stuff about this charmingly illicit client you wished on me? We'd have had to settle out of court.'
Nicholls shrugged. 'They had their reasons,' he said. 'After all, one case of exorcism, more or less, doesn't matter. But lawsuits set precedents. You're a lawyer, of sorts, Wilson; do you see what I mean?'
'Precedents?' Wilson looked at him slackjawed for a moment; then his eyes widened.
'I see you understand me.' Nicholls nodded. 'From now on in this state - and by virtue of the full-faith-and-credence clause of the Constitution, in every state of the country - a ghost has a legal right to haunt a house!'
'Good lord!' said Wilson. He began to laugh, not loud, but from the bottom of his chest.
Harley stared at Nicholls. 'Once and for all,' he whispered, 'tell me - what's your angle on all this?'
Nicholls smiled again.
'Think about it a while,' he said lightly. 'You'll begin to understand.' He sniffed his wine once more, then sat the glass down gently - And vanished.



***



As I've mentioned before, I was never a reader of Weird Tales, and its type of fiction did not captivate me. In 1950, though, when 'Legal Rites' finally appeared, Weird Tales was nearing the end of its thirty-year road and I'm rather glad I made its pages at least once before its end, even if only as half of a collaboration. It was the longest story in the issue and it received the cover.
'Legal Rites' and 'The Little Man on the Subway' are the only pieces of fiction I ever wrote in collaboration, and I didn't really enjoy the process. Later on in my career, I had occasion to collaborate on four or five non-fiction books and never really enjoyed that either, nor were any of the collaborations successful. I'm essentially a loner and like to take full responsibility for what I write.
In the case of 'Legal Rites' it seems to me that the beginning is mostly Pohl's rewriting; the trial scene is mostly mine; the ending - I don't remember.
Fantasy was not the only type of story I kept bullheadedly trying, over and over, without much success. Another type was the broadly farcical. I never sold either type to Campbell, but I at least sold the latter elsewhere.
Even while I was writing 'Legal Rites,' I was working on another robot story, but a humorous one - or what I considered humor. I called it 'Source of Power' and at least knew better than to waste time trying it on Campbell. I sent it directly to Thrilling Wonder, and when it was rejected there, I tried Amazing.
Amazing bought it on October 8, 1941 - my first sale to that magazine since those exciting beginning days of the fall of 1938. When it appeared on the stands (two days after Pearl Harbor) in the February 1942 issue, I found that Amazing had retitled it 'Robot AL-76 Goes Astray.'
Although 'Robot AL-76 Goes Astray' was a 'positronic robot' story, it didn't really fit in with the other three I had thus far written. When 1, Robot, my first collection of 'posi-tronic robot' stories, was put together, in 1950, I did not include 'Robot AL-76 Goes Astray' in that volume. When, however, in 1964, The Rest of the Robots was put together, I felt honor-bound by the title, if nothing else, to include all the remaining robot stories published till then, and therefore 'Robot AL-76 Goes Astray' was included.
August 1, 1941 ('Robot AL-76 Goes Astray' was then still working its slow way through the typewriter, because the Nazi invasion of the Soviet Union distracted me) was another important day in my writing career. I went to see John Campbell that day and, not liking to come to him without an idea, I thought hard on the subway ride there.
The fate of 'Pilgrimage' (soon to become 'Black Friar of the Flame') was still rankling, and I wanted to write another future-historical. I therefore suggested to him that I do a short story against the background of the slow fall of the Galactic Empire (something I intended to model quite frankly on the fall of the Roman Empire).
Campbell caught fire. We spent two hours together, and by the time it was over it was not going to be a short story at all, but an indefinitely long series of stories dealing with the fall of the First Galactic Empire and the rise of the Second.
I submitted the first story of the series, 'Foundation,' to Campbell on September 8, 1941, and it was accepted on the fifteenth. It appeared in the May 1942 issue of Astounding.
Over the next eight years I was to write seven more stories of what came to be called the 'Foundation' series, and these were finally collected into three volumes, Foundation, Foundation and Empire, and Second Foundation, which collectively were called The Foundation Trilogy.
Of all my science fiction, these books were most successful. First published in 1951, 1952 and 1953, respectively, they have been in print constantly as hard-covers ever since, despite the appearance of numerous soft-cover editions. And in 1966, at the 24th World Science Fiction Convention, in Cleveland, the 'Foundation' series received a Hugo (science fiction's equivalent of the Oscar) as the 'Best All-Time Series.'
After 'Foundation' I was ready to try a serious positronic robot story for the first time in half a year. This one, 'Run-around,' was submitted to Campbell on October 20, 1941, and he accepted it on the twenty-third. It appeared in the March 1942 issue of Astounding and was eventually included in I, Robot.
I then had to get to work at once on a sequel to 'Foundation.' 'Foundation' had been brought to an inconclusive ending on the assumption that a sequel would be forthcoming, and I had to come through. On November 17, the sequel, 'Bridle and Saddle,' which was the second story of the 'Foundation' series, was submitted to Campbell, and he accepted it the same day -a record in speed. What's more, it was the longest story I had yet written - eighteen thousand words - and even though I received no bonus, the check, for $180, was the largest single check I had yet received. 'Bridle and Saddle' was eventually included in Foundation.
Now, at last, I had a series of long stories going, together with my 'positronic robot' series of short stories. I was feeling quite good.
On November 17, 1941, the day I submitted and sold 'Bridle and Saddle,' Campbell told me his plan for starting a new department in Astounding, one to be called 'Probability Zero.' This was to be a department of short-shorts, five hundred to one thousand words, which were to be in the nature of plausible and entertaining Munchausen-like lies. Campbell 's notion was that, aside from the entertainment value of. these things, they would offer a place where beginners could penetrate the market without having to compete quite so hard with established writers. It would form a stairway to professional status.
This was a good idea in theory and even worked a little. Ray Bradbury, later to be one of the best-known and successful of all science fiction writers, broke into the field with a 'Probability Zero' item in the July 1942 Astounding. Hal Clement and George O. Smith also published in 'Probability Zero' near the very start of their careers.
Unfortunately, it didn't work enough. Campbell had to start the department going with professionals, hoping to let the amateurs carry on once they saw what it was Campbell wanted. There were, however, never enough amateurs who could meet Campbell 's standards even for short-shorts of an undemanding nature, and after twelve appearances of 'Probability Zero' over a space of two and a half years, Campbell gave up.
On November 17, however, he was just beginning, and he wanted me to do a 'Probability Zero' for him. I was delighted that he considered me to be at that stage of virtuosity where he could order me to do something for him according to measure. I promptly sat down and wrote a short-short called 'Big Game.' On November 24, 1941, I showed it to Campbell. He glanced over it and, rather to my astonishment, handed it back. It wasn't what he wanted.
I wish I could remember what 'Big Game' was about, for I thought enough of it to try submitting it to Collier's magazine (an over-awing slick) in 1944 - and it was, of course, rejected. The title, however, recalls nothing to my mind, and the story now no longer exists.
I tried a second time and did a humorous little positronic robot story called 'First Law.' I showed it to Campbell on December 1, and he didn't like that, either. This time, though, I kept the story. Thank goodness, I had finally learned that stories must be carefully saved for eternity, however many times they are rejected, and however firmly you imagine they are retired. 'Big Game' was the eleventh of my stories to disappear, but it was also the last.
In the case of 'First Law' there came a time when a magazine that did not exist in 1941 was to ask me for something. The magazine in question was Fantastic Universe, whose editor, Hans Stefan Santesson, asked me for a story at rates that would have been fine in 1941 but that by the mid-1950s I was reluctant to accept. I remembered 'First Law,' however, and sent it in. Santesson took it and ran it in the October 1956 issue of Fantastic Universe, and, eventually, I included it in The Rest of the Robots.
But back to 'Probability Zero' -
I tried a third time with a short-story called 'Time Pussy,' which I wrote on the morning of Sunday, December 7, 1941, finishing it just before the radio went crazy with the news of Pearl Harbor. I brought it in to Campbell the next day (life goes on!), and this time he took it, but 'not too enthusiastically,' according to my diary.






Time Pussy [15]


This was told me long ago by old Mac, who lived in a shack just over the hill from my old house. He had been a mining prospector out in the Asteroids during the Rush of '37, and spent most of his time now in feeding his seven cats.
'What makes you like cats so much, Mr. Mac?' I asked him.
The old miner looked at me and scratched his chin. 'Well,' he said, 'they reminds me o' my leetle pets on Pallas. They was something like cats - same kind of head, sort o' - and the cleverest leetle fellers y' ever saw. All dead!'
I felt sorry and said so. Mac heaved a sigh.
'Cleverest leetle fellers,' he repeated. They was four-dimensional pussies.'
'Four-dimensional, Mr. Mac? But the fourth dimension is time.' I had learned that the year before, in the third grade.
'So you've had a leetle schooling, hey?' He took out his pipe and filled it slowly. 'Sure, the fourth dimension is time. These pussies was about a foot long and six inches high and four inches wide and stretched somewheres into middle o' next week. That's four dimensions, ain't it?' Why, if you petted their heads, they wouldn't wag their tails till next day, mebbe. Some o' the big ones wouldn't wag till day after. Fact!'
I looked dubious, but didn't say anything.
Mac went on: 'They was the best leetle watchdogs in all creation, too. They had to be. Why, if they spotted a burglar or any suspicious character, they'd shriek like a banshee. And when one saw a burglar today, he'd shriek yesterday, so we had twenty-four hours' notice every time.'
My mouth opened. 'Honest?'
'Cross my heart! Y' want to know how we used to feed them? We'd wait for them to go to sleep, see, and then we'd know they was busy digesting their meals. These leetle time pussies, they always digested their meals exactly three hours before they ate it, on account their stomachs stretched that far back in time. So when they went to sleep, we used to look at the time, get their dinner ready and feed it to them exactly three hours later.'
He had lit his pipe now and was puffing away. He shook his head sadly. 'Once, though, I made a mistake. Poor leetle time pussy. His name was Joe, and he was just about my favorite, too. He went to sleep one morning at nine and somehow I got the idea it was eight. Naturally, I brought him his feed at eleven. I looked all over for him, but I couldn't find him.'
'What had happened, Mr. Mac?'
'Well, no time pussy's insides could be expected to handle his breakfast only two hours after digesting it. It's too much to expect. I found him finally under the tool kit in the outer shed. He had crawled there and died of indigestion an hour before. Poor leetle feller! After that, I always set an alarm, so I never made that mistake again.'
There was a short, mournful silence after that, and I resumed in a respectful whisper: 'You said they all died, before. Were they all killed like that?'
Mac shook his head solemnly. 'No! They used to catch colds from us fellers and just die anywhere from a week to ten days before they caught them. They wasn't too many to start with, and a year after the miners hit Pallas they wasn't but about ten left and them ten sort o' weak and sickly. The trouble was, leetle feller, that when they died, they went all to pieces; just rotted away fast. Especially the little four-dimensional jigger they had in their brains which made them act the way they did. It cost us all millions o' dollars.'
'How was that, Mr. Mac?'
'Y' see, some scientists back on Earth got wind of our leetle time pussies, and they knew they'd all be dead before they could get out there next conjunction. So they offered us all a million dollars for each time pussy we preserved for them.'
'And did you?'
'Well, we tried, but they wouldn't keep. After they died, they were just no good any more, and we had to bury them. We tried packing them in ice, but that only kept the outside all right. The inside was a nasty mess, and it was the inside the scientists wanted.
'Natur'lly, with each dead time pussy costing us a million dollars, we didn't want that to happen. One of us figured out that if we put a time pussy into hot water when it was about to die, the water would soak all through it. Then, after it died, we could freeze the water so it would just be one solid chunk o' ice, and then it would keep.'
My lower jaw was sagging. 'Did it work?'
'We tried and we tried, son, but we just couldn't freeze the water fast enough. By the time we had it all iced, the four-dimensional jigger in the time pussy's brain had just corrupted away. We froze the water faster and faster but it was no go. Finally, we had only one time pussy left, and he was just fixing to die, too. We was desperate - and then one of the fellers thought o' something. He figured out a complicated contraption that would freeze all the water just like that - in a split second.
'We picked up the last leetle feller and put him into the hot water and hooked on the machine. The leetle feller gave us a last look and made a funny leetle sound and died. We pressed the button and iced the whole thing into a solid block in about a quarter of a second.' Here Mac heaved a sigh that must have weighed a ton. 'But it was no use. The time pussy spoiled inside o' fifteen minutes and we lost the last million dollars.'
I caught my breath. 'But Mr. Mac, you just said you iced the time pussy in a quarter of a second. It didn't have time to spoil.'
'That's just it, leetle feller,' he said heavily. 'We did it too doggoned fast. The time pussy didn't keep because we froze that hot water so darned fast that the ice was still warm!'



***



The most unusual thing about this small item is that it was not published under my own name. Campbell wanted one item in that first 'Probability Zero' to appear to be by a non-professional, just to encourage the newcomers he hoped would try to break in. He had three entries in that first department and the other two were by L. Sprague de Camp and Malcolm Jameson. Both were longer-established and (despite 'Nightfall') more renowned than I. As low man, it was up to me to use a pseudonym and pretend to be a newcomer.
I saw Campbell 's point and, just a little sullenly, agreed. I used the name George E. Dale. It is the only time I ever used a pseudonym in the magazines. In later years I used the pseudonym Paul French on a series of six teen-age science fiction novels for reasons that are another story altogether. That was a special case, and in 1971 and 1972 those six novels appeared as paperbacks under my own name. Now 'Time Pussy' appears here under my own name, and the record is at last absolutely clean.





[1] Astounding Science Fiction, September 1940 Copyright © 1940 by Street amp; Smith Publications, Inc. Copyright renewed © 1967 by Isaac Asimov




[2] Astonishing Stories, December 1940 Copyright © 1940 by Fictioneers, Inc. Copyright renewed © 1967 by Isaac Asimov




[3] Super Science Stones, November 1942 Copyright © 1942 by Fictioneers, Inc. Copyright renewed © 1969 by Isaac Asimov




[4] Astonishing Stones, April 1941 Copyright © 1941 by Fictioneers, Inc. Copyright renewed © 1969 by Isaac Asimov




[5] Super Science Stories, March 1941 Copyright © 1941 by Fictioneers, Inc. Copyright renewed © 1968 by Isaac Asimov




[6] Startling Stones, January 1942, Copyright © 1941 by Better Publications, Inc., Copyright renewed © 1968 by Isaac Asimov




[7] Fantasy Book, Volume 1, Number 6, Copyright © 1950 by Fantasy Publishing Company, Inc.




[8] Thrilling Wonder Stories, October 1942 Copyright © 1942 by Better Publications, Inc. Copyright renewed © 1969 by Isaac Asimov




[9] Astonishing Stories, September 1941 Copyright © 1941 by Fictioneers, Inc. Copyright renewed © 1968 by Isaac Asimov




[10] Does anyone know in what essay, and in what connection, Emerson says this? Every once in a while I make a desultory search through quotation books or through a collection of Emerson but haven't found it yet. I hope it exists and that the quote is "given correctly.




[11] 'Black Friar of the Flame' was three thousand words longer than 'Nightfall,' but the former was not to be sold for another half year, and since it earned merely one cent a word, it brought in only $161. Of course, first-time earnings are not the whole story, either. 'Nightfall' has earned me some thousands of dollars since 1941 and will yet earn me more; 'Black Friar of the Flame' has not yet earned me one cent over the original check - till its appearance in this book.




[12] In telling the story, in that collection, of how 'Nightfall' came to be written, I mentioned that I had received $150 for it, quoting from memory. Once again, I must confess fallibility. The records say $166. It is a small point, and perhaps not worth noting, but I know my readers. By explaining this now, I fend off dozens of letters that will mention the discrepancy and demand an explanation.




[13] Astounding Science Fiction, October 1941, Copyright © 1941 by Street amp; Smith Publications, Inc., Copyright renewed © 1968 by Isaac Asimov




[14] Weird Tales, September 1950 Copyright © 1950 by Weird Tales




[15] Astounding Science Fiction, April 1942, Copyright © 1942 by Street amp; Smith Publications, Inc.




Isaac Asimov


The Early Asimov. Volume 3





or, Eleven Years of Trying








To the memory of
John Wood Campbell, Jr. (1910-1971) for reasons that this book will make amply obvious









Introduction



After 'Time Pussy'

[1] there followed a two-month period during which I wrote nothing.
The reasons were twofold. In the first place, Pearl Harbor put the United States in the war the day I wrote Time Pussy,' and those first two months after the debacle were too disastrous and heartbreaking to allow much in the way of fiction composing.
If that in itself weren't enough, the time had come to try, once again, the qualifying examinations that would, or would not, grant me permission to do research. I very much felt myself to be dangling over the abyss. A second failure to pass would probably mean an end for me at Columbia. Consequently, during those hours when I wasn't working in my father's candy store or hanging over the radio, I had to be studying. There was time for nothing else at all.
Hedging my bets rather desperately, I registered for graduate work at New York University, just in case I did not pass once again. After I took my qualifying examinations, at the end of January 1942, I actually attended a few classes at N.Y.U. while waiting for the results to be announced. - But I won't keep you in suspense. On Friday, the thirteenth of February, the results were announced. I had passed, this time.
During the interval between the taking of the qualifying examinations and the annunciation, I managed to do 'Victory Unintentional.' This was a positronic robot story that was a sequel to 'Not Final!' which had not been a positronic robot story. Obviously I was trying to ride the series notion all I could, in the hope of surer sales.
I submitted it to Campbell on February 9, 1942, and if I thought Campbell would find himself unable to reject a series story, I was roundly disabused. Nor was he so impressed by 'Nightfall' and by my 'Foundation' series as to find himself incapable of making the rejection a severe one.
On February 13, the very day of my passing into the sacred list of those permitted to do research toward their Ph.D., my spirits were somewhat dashed when I received 'Victory Unintentional' back with a cryptic rejection, which consisted of the following, in toto, 'CHSC2CH2CH2SH.' Campbell very well knew that this was the formula for 'butyl' mercaptan,' which gives the skunk its smell, and I very well knew it, too, and Campbell very well knew I knew.
Oh, well! I managed to sell it anyway, to Super Science Stories under its post-Pohl editor, on March 16, 1942, and it appeared in the August 1942 issue of that magazine. Though I did not include it in I, Robot, I did include it, of necessity, in The Rest of the Robots.
After that, though, there came another dry period, the longest I was ever to experience. Once 'Victory Unintentional' was finished, fourteen months (!) were to pass before I turned back to the typewriter. It was not the conventional 'writer's block,' of course, for that I have never experienced. Rather, it was the coming of a vast, triple change in my life.
The first change was the fact that I was now beginning chemical research in earnest under Professor Charles R. Daw-son. Research is a full-time job and I still had to work it around, somehow, my duties in my father's candy store,.so there was bound to be very little time for writing.
Then, as though that weren't enough, a second change took place simultaneously -
In January 1942 I joined an organization called 'The Brooklyn Writers' Club,' which had sent me a postcard of invitation. I took the invitation to be a recognition of my status as a 'writer' and I couldn't possibly have refused.
The first meeting I attended was on January 19, 1942. It turned out to be rather pleasant. I welcomed the chance to get my mind off the qualifying examinations and the war disasters (though I remember spending part of that first meeting discussing the possibility that New York might be bombed).
Most of the members of the club were no further advanced in the profession than I was; nor were any of them, aside from myself, science fiction writers. The chief activity consisted of reading from our own manuscripts so that criticism from the others might be invited. Since it was quickly discovered that I read 'with expression,' I became chief reader, a role I enjoyed. (It was to be eight years yet before I discovered that I had a natural flair for the lecture platform.)
On February 9, 1942, the third meeting I attended, there was present a young man, Joseph Goldberger, whom I had not met before. He was a couple of years older than I was. I did most of the reading that day and Goldberger was sufficiently impressed to suggest, after the meeting had adjourned, that the two of us, with our girls, go out on a double date and get to know each other. Embarrassed, I had to explain that I had no girl. With an expansive gesture, he said he would get one for me.
And so he did. On February 14, 1942, (Valentine's Day and the day after I had passed my qualifying examinations) I met him at the Astor Hotel at 8.30 p.m. With him was his girlfriend, and with her was her girl-friend, Gertrude Blugerman, who was going to be my blind date. -I fell in love, and when I wasn't thinking of research I was thinking of her.
But there was also a third change, in a way the most drastic-
With war, the job situation suddenly changed: technically trained men of all sorts were in demand.
Robert Heinlein, for instance, was an engineer who had been trained at Annapolis. His health had retired him from active service in the Navy and had kept him retired, but his Annapolis connections made it possible for him to work as a civilian engineer at the Naval Air Experimental Station of the U.S. Navy Yard in Philadelphia. He cast about for other qualified people he might persuade to join him there, particularly among his fellow science fiction writers.
He got L. Sprague de Camp to come to the N.A.E.S., and on March 30, 1942, I received a letter from the navy yard asking if I would consider joining them.
I am rather single-minded and, having labored toward my Ph.D. for a year and a half, I would not ordinarily have considered letting go for anything short of a major force. - But the major force was there. I was in love and I wanted to get married even more than I wanted my degree. It occurred to me that I could suspend work toward my Ph.D. with the full approval of the school, thanks to the war emergency, and that I could also get full permission to resume after the war. And by taking a job and postponing - merely postponing - my research, I could get married.
I went down to Philadelphia for an interview on April 10 and apparently met their requirements. I took the iob, and on May 14, having left my father's candy store at last and (at least as a worker) forever, I moved to Philadelphia. Fortunately, Philadelphia was only an hour and a half from New York by train (in those days, I couldn't drive a car and, even if I could, I wouldn't have been able to get the gasoline because of rationing). I was therefore back in New York every weekend.
By the twenty-fourth of the month I had persuaded Gertrude to agree to marry me, and on July 26 we were married.
During those months it did not bother me that I was doing no writing. I had too much to think of - first the war, then research, then the job, then the marriage.
Besides, in the years up to early 1942, I never thought of my writing as anything but a way to help out with my college tuition. It was fun; it was exciting; and such success as I managed to achieve was deeply satisfying - but it had been done to serve a purpose and that purpose had been served. I had no notion that writing could be my career; that it could ever possibly be my career.
My career was to be chemistry. All the time I was writing and selling stories, I was also slaving away at Columbia. Once I earned my Ph.D., I intended to make my living by doing chemical research for some large industry at some munificent salary such as a hundred dollars a week. (As the son of a candy-store keeper, brought up in the depression, I suffered dizzy spells if I tried to think of more than a hundred dollars a week, so I confined my ambitions to that.)
My Philadelphia job, to be sure, paid me only fifty dollars a week at the beginning, but a young couple could live on that, those days, with taxes very small, with an apartment costing $42.50 a month and dinner for two at a restaurant coming to two dollars (including tip).
It wasn't the height of my dreams, but it was only a temporary war job, after all. Once the war was over, I would go back to my research and get my Ph.D. and a better job. Meanwhile, even a salary of $2,600 a year seemed to make it unnecessary for me to write. By my marriage day, I had written forty-two stories, of which twenty-eight had been sold (and three more were yet to sell). My total bachelor earnings over a space of four years had been $1,788.50 for those twenty-eight stories. This amounted to an average earning of just under $8.60 per week or $64 per story.
I never dreamed at that time that I could ever do much better. I had no intention of ever writing anything but science fiction or fantasy for the pulp magazines, which paid one cent a word at most - a cent and a quarter with bonus.
To make even the feeble fifty dollars a week that my job paid me would make it necessary for me to write and sell some forty stories a year, and, at that time, that didn't seem conceivable to me.
It had been all right to labor at the typewriter to pay my way through school, when I had no other source of income, but for what purpose ought I to be writing now? And with a six-day, fifty-four hour week, and the excitement of a new marriage, who had time?
The very existence of science fiction seemed to fade. I had left my magazine collection in New York; I no longer saw Campbell regularly, or Pohl, or any of my science fiction cronies. I scarcely even read the current magazines as they came out.
I might have let science fiction die altogether, and my writing career with it, except that there were little reminders from the outside world, and little itchings inside me that meant (though-I didn't know it at the time) that writing was a great deal more to me than just a handy device to make a little spare cash.
I had hardly begun to work at the N.A.E.S., for instance, when the June 1942 issue of Astounding came out with my story 'Bridle and Saddle.' And it made the cover.
It was quite beyond my power to resist the temptation to take a copy to work and show it around. I couldn't help but feel the status I gained as a 'writer.' Later that summer and fall, three other stories were published: 'Victory Unintentional' and 'The Imaginary' in the post-Pohl Super Science Stories and 'The Hazing' in Thrilling Wonder Stories. Each kept the science fiction world alive for me.
And although my New York coterie of science fiction editors, writers and readers were gone, I was left not entirely bereft.
Working with me at the N.A.E.S. were Robert Heinlein and L. Sprague de Camp, and I kept up a close social relationship with both. To be sure, each had quit writing for the duration but they were far more successful writers than I was and I hero-worshipped them. In addition, John D. Clark, who was an ardent science fiction fan and who had written and published a couple of stories in 1937, was living in Philadelphia at the time and we frequently saw one another. All three kept the science fiction atmosphere about me.
It was on January 5, 1943, though, that the real trigger came. On that day I received a letter from Fred Pohl to the effect that he was planning to rewrite 'Legal Rites' and was going to try to sell it again. That was exciting. He wasn't to succeed in selling the story for six more years, but of course I had no way of telling that. To me it seemed that another sale was in the offing and that I was an as-yet-active writer.
Besides, 'Legal Rites' was a fantasy and I had never yet satisfied that long-standing desire to write and sell a fantasy to Unknown. Five times I had tried, and five times I had failed.
On January 13, quite suddenly, a week after the letter had come and fourteen months after my last-written story, the urge overwhelmed me. I sat down to write a fantasy called 'Author! Author!'
Quickly I found there was something lacking. It was the first time I had ever tried to write something for Campbell without conferences with him. I missed the inspiration that invariably came through talks with him; I missed his encouragement. In fact, I wasn't sure that I could write at all without him. So the story limped and there were dry spells. I didn't finish the first draft till March 5, and the final version wasn't ready for mailing till April 4, 1943.
It had taken me nearly three months to write the story. To be sure, it was twelve thousand words long, but 'Bridle and Saddle,' which was half again as long, had taken me only three weeks.
Perhaps if 'Author! Author!' had been rejected, it might have been a long time before I would have had the courage to try again. Fortunately, that was never put to the test. I mailed the story to Campbell on April 6, 1943 (the first time I ever mailed him a story instead of handing it to him), and on the twelfth the check of acceptance arrived. There was not even a revision requested, and what's more, Campbell paid me a bonus for the first time since 'Nightfall.' I received one and a quarter cents a word, or $ 150 in all. My sixth try at Unknown had succeeded.
It was the equivalent of three weeks' pay at the N.A.E.S. for something that had taken me, off and on, three months. However, the three months' work on 'Author! Author!' had been of a totally different kind than the three weeks' work at the N.A.E.S. would have been, and the receipt of the $150 check was infinitely more exciting than picking up a similar check, or even a larger.one, earned in the course of a punch-the-time-clock job. (Yes, indeed, I punched a time clock at the N.A.E.S.)
As it happened though, the happy excitement with which I greeted the sale was premature. I had scaled the heights of Unknown too late, and though I had the money, I didn't have the magazine. Robert Heinlein brought me the sad news on August 2, less than four months after the sale.
Unknown had been having a difficult time of it. Sales weren't high enough, and after its first two years of operation it had had to switch from monthly to bimonthly issues. Now the war had introduced a paper shortage and Street amp; Smith Publications decided to save what paper it could receive for the more successful Astounding and let Unknown go.
At the time I made my sale, there were only three more issues of Unknown fated to be issued and there was no room in any of them for 'Author! Author!' The story remained in the vaults of Street amp; Smith indefinitely; a story sold, but not published; and the $150 check was deprived of most of its fun as a result.
There is, however, a happy ending. Twenty years later, Don Bensen of Pyramid Publications was publishing a paperback anthology of stories from Unknown, he asked me for an introduction. With glad nostalgia I complied, writing it on January 15, 1963, almost twenty years to the day after I had started writing the only story I ever sold to the magazine. In the course of the introduction, I referred to the sad story of my attempts to write for Unknown.
The 1960s were not the 1940s. In 1963, the mere mention of an existing Asimov story that had never been published produced excitement, and Bensen wrote to me within three days, asking to see the story. I dug out the manuscript (I saved them now, you see, even for twenty years) and sent it to him.
He asked permission to include it in a second anthology of Unknown stories (pointing out that it had been accepted by the magazine). I explained he would also need permission from Campbell and the publisher. They very kindly granted the permission, and in January 1964, twenty-one years after it was written, 'Author! Author!' was finally published and I finally - after a fashion, and glancingly - made Unknown.






Author! Author! [2]


It occurred to Graham Dorn, and not for the first time, either, that there was one serious disadvantage in swearing you'll go through fire and water for a girl, however beloved. Sometimes she takes you at your miserable word.
This is one way of saying that he had been waylaid, shanghaied and dragooned by his fiancee into speaking at her maiden aunt's Literary Society. Don't laugh! It's not funny from the speaker's rostrum. Some of the faces you have to look at!
To race through the details, Graham Dorn had been jerked onto a platform and forced upright. He had read a speech on 'The Place of the Mystery Novel in American Literature' in an appalled tone. Not even the fact that his own eternally precious June had written it (part of the bribe to get him to speak in the first place) could mask the fact that it was essentially tripe.
And then when he was weltering, figuratively speaking, in his own mental gore, the harpies closed in, for lo, it was time for the informal discussion and assorted feminine gush.
óÖOh, Mr. Dorn, do you work from inspiration? I mean, do you just sit down and then an idea strikes you - all at once? And you must sit up all night and drink black coffee to keep you awake till you get it down?
óOh, yes. Certainly. (His working hours were two to four in the afternoon every other day, and he drank milk.)
óÖOh, Mr. Dorn, you must do the most awful research to get all those bizarre murders. About how much must you do before you can write a story?
óAbout six months, usually. (The only reference books he ever used were a six-volume encyclopedia and year-before-last's World Almanac.)
óOh, Mr. Dorn, did you make up your Reginald de Meister from a real character? You must have. He's oh, so convincing in his every detail.
óHe's modeled after a very dear boyhood chum of mine. (Dorn had never known anyone like de Meister, He lived in continual fear of meeting someone like him. He had even a cunningly fashioned ring containing a subtle Oriental poison for use just in case he did. So much for de Meister.)
Somewhere past the knot of women, June Billings sat in her seat and smiled with sickening and proprietary pride.
Graham passed a finger over his throat and went through the pantomime of choking to death as unobtrusively as possible. June smiled, nodded, threw him a delicate kiss, and did nothing.
Graham decided to pass a stern, lonely, woman-less life and to have nothing but villainesses in his stories forever after.
He was answering in monosyllables, alternating yesses and noes. Yes, he did take cocaine on occasion. He found it helped the creative urge. No, he didn't think he could allow Hollywood to take over de Meister. He thought movies weren't true expressions of real Art. Besides, they were just a passing fad. Yes. he would read Miss Cram's manuscripts if she brought them. Only too glad to. Reading amateur manuscripts was such fun, and editors are really such brutes.
And then refreshments were announced, and there was a sudden vacuum. It took a split-second for Graham's head to clear. The mass of femininity had coalesced into a single specimen. She was four feet ten and about eighty-five pounds in weight. Graham was six-two and two hundred ten worth of brawn. He could probably have handled her without difficulty, especially since both her arms were occupied with a pachyderm of a purse. Still, he felt a little delicate, to say nothing of queasy, about knocking her down. It didn't seem quite the thing to do.
She was advancing, with admiration and fervor disgustingly clear in her eyes, and Graham felt the wall behind him. There was no doorway within armreach on either side.
'Oh, Mr. de Meister - do, do please let me call you Mr. de Meister. Your creation is so real to me, that I can't think of you as simply Graham Dorn. You don't mind, do you?'
'No, no, of course not,' gargled Graham, as well as he could through thirty-two teeth simultaneously set on edge. 'I often think of myself as Reginald in my more frivolous moments.'
'Thank you. You can have no idea, dear Mr. de Meister, how I have looked forward to meeting you. I have read all your works, and I think they are wonderful.'
'I'm glad you think so.' He went automatically into the modesty routine. 'Really nothing, you know. Ha, ha, ha! Like to please the readers, but lots of room for improvement. Ha, ha, ha!'
'But you really are, you know.' This was said with intense earnestness. 'I mean good, really good. I think it is wonderful to be an author like you. It must be almost like being God.'
Graham stared blankly. 'Not to editors, sister.'
Sister didn't get the whisper. She continued, 'To be able to create living characters out of nothing; to unfold souls to all the world; to put thoughts into words; to build pictures and create worlds. I have often thought than an author was the most graciously gifted person in creation. Better an inspired author starving in a garret than a king upon his throne. Don't you think so?'
'Definitely,' lied Graham.
'What are the crass material goods of the world to the wonders of weaving emotions and deeds into a little world of its own?'
'What, indeed?'
'And posterity, think of posterity!'
'Yes, yes. I often do.'
She seized his hand. There's only one little request. You might,' she blushed faintly, 'you might give poor Reginald - if you will allow me to call him that just once - a chance to marry Letitia Reynolds. You make her just a little too cruel to him. I'm sure I weep over it for hours together sometimes. But then he is too, too real to me.'
And from somewhere, a lacy frill of handkerchief made its appearance, and went to her eyes. She removed it, smiled bravely, and scurried away. Graham Dorn inhaled, closed his eyes, and gently collapsed into June's arms.
His eyes opened with a jerk. 'You may consider,' he said severely, 'our engagement frazzled to the breaking point. Only my consideration for your poor, aged parents prevents your being known henceforward as the ex-fiancee of Graham Dorn.'
'Darling, you are so noble.' She massaged his sleeve with her cheeks. 'Come, I'll take you home and bathe your poor wounds.'
'All right, but you'll have to carry me. Has your precious, loveable aunt got an axe?'
'But why?'
'For one thing, she had the gall to introduce me as the brainfather, God help me, of the famous Reginald de Meister.'
'And aren't you?'
'Let's get out of this creep-joint. And get this. I'm no relative by brain or otherwise, of that character. I disown him. I cast him into the darkness. I spit upon him. I declare him an illegitimate son, a foul degenerate, and the offspring of a hound, and I'll be damned if he ever pokes his lousy patrician nose into my typewriter again.'
They were in the taxi, and June straightened his tie. 'All right, Sonny, let's see the letter.'
'What letter?'
She held out her hand. 'The one from the publishers.'
Graham snarled and flipped it out of his jacket pocket. 'I've thought of inviting myself to his house for tea, the damned flintheart. He's got a rendezvous with a pinch of strychnine.'
'You may rave later. What does he say? Hmm - uh-huh -"doesn't quite come up to what is expected - feel that de Meister isn't in his usual form - a little revision perhaps towards - feel sure the novel can be adjusted - are returning under separate cover-"'
She tossed it aside. 'I told you you shouldn't have killed off Sancha Rodriguez. She was what you needed. You're getting skimpy on the love interest.'
'You write it! I'm through with de Meister. It's getting so club-women call me Mr. de Meister, and my picture is printed in newspapers with the caption Mr. de Meister. I have no individuality. No one ever heard of Graham Dorn. I'm always: Dorn, Dorn, you know, the guy who writes the de Meister stuff, you know.'
June squealed, 'Silly! You're jealous of your own detective.'
'I am not jealous of my own character. Listen! I hate detective stories. I never read them after I got into the two-syllable words. I wrote the first as a clever, trenchant, biting satire. It was to blast the entire false school of mystery writers. That's why I invented this de Meister. He was the detective to end all detectives. The Compleat Ass, by Graham Dorn.
'So the public, along with snakes, vipers and ungrateful children takes this filth to its bosom. I wrote mystery after mystery trying to convert the public -'
Graham Dorn drooped a little at the futility of it all.
'Oh, well.' He smiled wanly, and the great soul rose above adversity. 'Don't you see? I've got to write other things. I can't waste my life. But who's going to read a serious novel by Graham Dorn, now that I'm so thoroughly identified with de Meister?'
'You can use a pseudonym.'
'I will not use a pseudonym. I'm proud of my name.'
'But you can't drop de Meister. Be sensible, dear.'
'A normal fiancee,' Graham said bitterly, 'wou'd want her future husband to write something really worthwhile and become a great name in literature.'
'Well, I do want you to, Graham. But just a little de Meister once in a while to pay the bills that accumulate.'
'Ha!' Graham knocked his hat over his eyes to hide the sufferings of a strong spirit in agony. 'Now you say that I can't reach prominence unless I prostitute my art to that unmentionable. Here's your place. Get out. I'm going home and write a good scorching letter on asbestos to our senile Mr. MacDun-lap.'
'Do exactly as you want to, cookie,' soothed June. 'And tomorrow when you feel better, you'll come and cry on my shoulder, and we'll plan a revision of Death on the Third Deck together, shall we?'
'The engagement,' said Graham, loftily, 'is broken.'
'Yes, dear. I'll be home tomorrow at eight.'
That is of no possible interest to me. Good-bye!'
Publishers and editors are untouchables, of course. Theirs is a heritage of the outstretched hand and the well-toothed smile; the nod of the head and the slap of the back.
But perhaps somewhere, in the privacy of the holes to which authors scurry when the night falls, a private revenge it taken. There, phrases may be uttered where no one can overhear, and letters may be written that need not be mailed, and perhaps a picture of an editor, smiling pensively, is enshrined above the typewriter to act the part of bulls-eye in an occasional game of darts.
Such a picture of MacDunlap, so used, enlightened Graham Dorn's room. And Graham Dora himself, in his usual writing costume (street-clothes and typewriter), scowled at the fifth sheet of paper in his typewriter. The other four were draped over the edge of the waste-basket, condemned for their milk-and-watery mildness.
He began:
'Dear Sir -' and added slowly and viciously, 'or Madam, as the case may be.'
He typed furiously as the inspiration caught him, disregarding the faint wisp of smoke curling upward from the overheated keys:
'You say you don't think much of de Meister in this story. Well, I don't think much of de Meister, period. You can handcuff your slimy carcass to his and jump off the Brooklyn Bridge. And I hope they drain the East River just before you jump.
'From now on, my works will be aimed higher than your scurvy press. And the day will come when I can look back on this period of my career with the loathing that is its just -'
Someone had been tapping Graham on the shoulder during the last paragraph. Graham twitched it angrily and ineffectively at intervals.
Now he stopped, turned around, and addressed the stranger in his room courteously: 'Who the devilish damnation are you? And you can leave without bothering to answer. I won't think you rude.'
The newcomer smiled graciously. His nod wafted the delicate aroma of some unobtrusive hair-oil toward Graham. His lean, hard-bitten jaw stood out keenly, and he said in a well-modulated voice:
'De Meister is the name. Reginald de Meister.'
Graham rocked to his mental foundations and heard them creak.
'Glub,' he said.
'Pardon?'
Graham recovered. 'I said, "glub," a little code word meaning which de Meister.'
'The de Meister,' explained de Meister, kindly.
'My character?- My detective?'
De Meister helped himself to a seat, and his finely-chiseled features assumed that air of well-bred boredom so admired in the best circles. He lit a Turkish cigarette, which Graham at once recognized as his detective's favorite brand, tapping it slowly and carefully against the back of his hand first, a mannerism equally characteristic.
'Really, old man,' said de Meister. 'This is really excruciat-inly funny. I suppose I am your character, y'know, but let's not work on that basis. It would be so devastatin'ly awkward.'
'Glub,' said Graham again, by way of a rejoinder.
His mind was feverishly setting up alternatives. He didn't drink, more, at the moment, was the pity, so he wasn't drunk. He had a chrome-steel digestion and he wasn't overheated, so it wasn't a hallucination. He never dreamed, and his imagination - as befitted a paying commodity - was under strict control. And since, like all authors, he was widely considered more than half a screwball, insanity was out of the question.
Which left de Meister simply an impossibility, and Graham felt relieved. It's a very poor author indeed who hasn't learned the fine art of ignoring impossibilities in writing a book.
He said smoothly, 'I have here a volume of my latest work. Do you mind naming your page and crawling back into it. I'm a busy man and God knows I have enough of you in the tripe I write.'
'But I'm here on business, old chap. I've got to come to a friendly arrangement with you first. Things are deucedly uncomfortable as they are.'
'Look, do you know you're bothering me? I'm not in the habit of talking to mythical characters. As a general thing, I don't pal around with them. Beside which, it's time your mother told you that you really don't exist.'
'My dear fellow, I always existed. Existence is such a subjective thing. What a mind thinks exists, does exist. I existed in your mind, for instance, ever since you first thought of me.'
Graham shuddered. 'But the question is, what are you doing out of my mind? Getting a little narrow for you? Want elbow room?'
'Not at all. Rather satisfact'ry mind in its way, but I achieved a more concrete existence only this afternoon, and so I seize the opportunity to engage you face to face in the aforementioned business conversation. You see, that thin, sentimental lady of your society -'
'What society?' questioned Graham hollowly. It was all awfully clear to him now.
'The one at which you made a speech' - de Meister shuddered in his turn - 'on the detective novel. She believed in my existence, so naturally, I exist.'
He finished his cigarette and flicked it out with a negligent twist of the wrist.
'The logic,' declared Graham, 'is inescapable. Now, what do you want and the answer is no.'
'Do you realize, old man, that if you stop writing de Meister stories, my existence will become that dull, wraithlike one of all superannuated fictional detectives. I'd have to gibber through the gray mists of Limbo with Holmes, Lecocoq and Dupin.'
'A very fascinating thought, I think. A very fitting fate.' Reginald de Meister's eyes turned icy, and Graham suddenly remembered the passage on page 123 of The Case of the Broken Ashtray:
His eyes, hitherto lazy and unattentive, hardened into twin pools of blue ice and transfixed the butler, who staggered back, a stifled cry on his lips,
Evidently, de Meister lost none of his characteristics out of the novels he adorned.
Graham staggered back, a stifled cry on his lips.
De Meister said menacingly, 'It would be better for you if the de Meister mysteries continue. Do you understand?'
Graham recovered and summoned a feeble indignation. 'Now, wait a while. You're getting out of hand. Remember: in a way, I'm your father. That's right. Your mental father. You can't hand me ultimatums or make threats. It isn't filial. It's lacking in the proper respect and love.'
'And another thing.' said de Meister, unmoved. 'We've got to straighten out this business of Letitia Reynolds. It's gettin' deucedly borin', y'know.'
'Now you're getting silly. My love scenes have been widely heralded as miracles of tenderness and sentiment not found in one murder mystery out of a thousand. - Wait, I'll get you a few reviews. I don't mind your attempts to dictate my actions so much, but I'm damned if you'll criticize my writing.'
'Forget the reviews. Tenderness and all that rot is what I don't want. I've been driftin' after the fair lady for five volumes now, and behavin' the most insufferable ass. This has got to stop.'
'In what way?'
'I've got to marry her in your present story. Either that, or make her a good, respectable mistress. And you'll have to stop making me so damned Victorian and gentlemanly towards ladies. I'm only human, old man.'
'Impossible!' said Graham, 'and that includes your last remark.'
De Meister grew severe. 'Really, old chap, for an author, you display the most appallio' lack of concern for the well-bein' of a character who has supported you for a good many years.'
Graham choked eloquently. 'Supported me? In other words, you think I couldn't sell real novels, hey? Well, I'll show you. I wouldn't write another de Meister story for a million dollars. Not even for a fifty percent royalty and all television rights. How's that?'
De Meister frowned and uttered those words that had been the sound of doom to so many criminals: 'We shall see, but yon are not yet done with me.'
With firmly jutting jaw, he vanished.
Graham's twisted face straightened out, and slowly - very slowly - he brought his hands up to his cranium and felt carefully.
For the first time in a long and reasonably ribald mental life, he felt that his enemies were right and that a good dry cleaning would not hurt his mind at all.
The things that existed in it!
Graham Dorn shoved the doorbell with his elbow a second time. He distinctly remembered her saying she would be home at eight.
The peep-hole shoved open. 'Hello!'
'Hello!'
Silence!
Graham said plaintively, 'It's raining outside. Can't I come in to dry?'
'I don't know. Are we engaged, Mr. Dorn?'
'If I'm not,' was the stiff reply, 'then I've been turning down the frenzied advances of a hundred passion-stricken girls -beautiful ones, all of them - for no apparent reason.'
'Yesterday, you said -'
'Ah, but who listens to what I say? I'm just quaint that way. Look, I brought you posies.' He flourished roses before the peep-hole.
June opened the door. 'Roses! How plebeian. Come in, cookie, and sully the sofa. Whoa, whoa, before you move a step, what have you got under the other arm? Not the manuscript of Death on the Third Deck?'
'Correct. Not that excrescence of a manuscript. This is something different.'
June's tone chilled. 'That isn't your precious novel, is it?'
Graham flung his head up, 'How did you know about it?'
'You slobbered the plot all over me at MacDunlap's silver anniversary party.'
'I did not. I couldn't unless I were drunk.'
'Oh, but you were. Stinking is the term. And on two cocktails too.'
'Well, if I was drunk, I couldn't have told you the right plot.'
'Is the setting a coal-mine district?'
'-Uh-yes.'
'And are the people concerned real, earthy, unartificial, down-to-earth characters, speaking and thinking just like you and me? Is it a story of basic economic forces? Are the human characters lifted up and thrown down and whirled around, all at the mercy of the coal mine and mechanized industry of today?'
'-Uh-yes.'
She nodded her head retrospectively. 'I remember distinctly. First, you got drunk and were sick. Then you got better, and told me the first few chapters. Then I got sick.'
She approached the glowering author. 'Graham.' She leant her golden head upon his shoulder and cooed softly. 'Why don't you continue with the de Meister stories? You get such pretty checks out of them.'
Graham writhed out of her grasp. 'You are a mercenary wretch, incapable of understanding an author's soul. You may consider our engagement broken.'
He sat down hard on the sofa, and folded his arms. 'Unless you will consent to read the script of my novel and give me the usual story analysis.'
'May I give you my analysis of Death on the Third Deck first?'
'No.'
'Good! In the first place, your love interest is becoming sickening.'
'It is not.' Graham pointed his finger indignantly. 'It breathes a sweet and sentimental fragrance, as of an older day. I've got the review here that says it.' He fumbled in his wallet.
'Oh, bullfeathers. Are you going to start quoting that guy in the Pillsboro (Okla.) Clarion? He's probably your second cousin. You know that your last two novels were completely below par in royalties. And Third Deck isn't even being sold.'
'So much the better - Ow!' He rubbed his head violently. 'What did you do that for?'
'Because the only place I could hit as hard as I wanted to, without disabling you, was your head. Listen! The public is tired of your corny Letitia Reynolds. Why don't you let her soak her "gleaming golden crown of hair" in kerosene and get familiar with a match?'
'But June, that character is drawn from life. From you!'
'Graham Dorn! I am not here to listen to insults. The mystery market today is swinging toward action and hot, honest love and you're still in the sweet, sentimental stickiness of five years ago.'
'But that's Reginald de Meister's character.'
'Well, change his character. Listen! You introduce Sancha Rodriguez. That's fine. I approve of her. She's Mexican, flaming, passionate, sultry and in love with him. So what do you do? First he behaves the impeccable gentleman, and then you kill her off in the middle of the story.'
'Hmm, I see - You really think it would improve things to have de Meister forget himself. A kiss or so -'
June clenched her lovely teeth and her lovely fists. 'Oh, darling, how glad I am love is blind! If it ever peeked one tiny little bit, I couldn't stand it. Look, you squirrel's blue plate special, you're going to have de Meister and Rodriguez fall in love. They're going to have an affair through the entire book and you can put your horrible Letitia into a nunnery. She would probably be happier there from the way you make her sound.'
'That's all you know about it, my sweet. It so happens that Reginald de Meister is in love wifh Letitia Reynolds and wants her, not this Rodriguez person.'
'And what makes you think that?'
'He told me so.'
'Who told you so?'
'Reginald de Meister.'
'What Reginald de Meister?'
'My Reginald de Meister.'
'What do you mean, your Reginald de Meister?'
'My character, Reginald de Meister.'
June got up, indulged in some deep-breathing and then said in a very calm voice, 'Let's start all over.'
She disappeared for a moment and returned with an aspirin. 'Your Reginald de Meister, from your books, told you, in person, he was in love with Letitia Reynolds?'
'That's right.'
June swallowed the aspirin.
'Well, I'll explain, June, the way he explained it to me. All characters really exist - at least, in the minds of the authors. But when people really begin to believe in them, they begin to exist in reality, because what people believe in, is, so far as they're concerned, and what is existence anyway?'
June's lips trembled. 'Oh, Gramie, please don't. Mother will never let me marry you if they put you in an asylum.'
'Don't call me Gramie, June, for God's sake. I tell you he was there, trying to tell me what to write and how to write it. He was almost as bad as you. Aw, come on, Baby, don't cry.'
'I can't help it. I always thought you were crazy, but I never thought you were crazy!'
'All right, what's the difference? Let's not talk about it any more. I'm never going to write another mystery novel. After all' - (he indulged in a bit of indignation) - 'when it gets so that my own character - my own character - tries to tell me what to do, it's going too far.'
June looked over her handkerchief. 'How do you know it was really de Meister?'
'Oh, golly. As soon as he tapped his Turkish cigarette on the back of his hand and started dropping g's like snowflakes in a blizzard, I knew the worst had come.'
The telephone rang. June leaped up. 'Don't answer, Graham. It's probably from the asylum. I'll tell them you're not here. Hello. Hello. Oh, Mr. MacDunlap.' She heaved a sigh of relief, then covered the mouthpiece and whispered hoarsely, 'It might be a trap.'
'Hello, Mr. MacDunlap!Ö No, he's not hereÖYes, I
think I can get in touch with himÖAt Martin's tomorrow,
noonÖ I'll tell himÖ With who?Ö With who???' She hung up suddenly.
'Graham, you're to lunch with MacDunlap tomorrow,'
'At his expense! Only at his expense! '
Her great blue eyes got greater and bluer, 'And Reginald de Meister is to dine with you."
'What Reginald de Meister?'
'Your Reginald de Meister.'
'My Reg-'
'Oh, Gramie, don't.' Her eyes misted, 'Don't you see, Gramie, now they'll put us both in an insane asylum - and Mr. MacDunlap, too. And they'll probably put us all in the same padded cell. Oh, Gramie, three is such a dreadful crowd.'
And her face crumpled into tears.
Grew S. MacDunlap (that the S. stands for 'Some' is a vile untruth spread by his enemies) was alone at the table when Graham Dorn entered. Out of this fact, Graham extracted a few fleeting drops of pleasure.
It was not so much, you understand, the presence of MacDunlap that did it, as the absence of de Meister.
MacDunlap looked at him over his spectacles and swallowed a liver pill, his favorite sweetmeat.
'Aha. You're here. What is this corny joke you're putting over on me? You had no right to mix me up with a person like de Meister without warning me he was real. I might have taken precautions. I could have hired a bodyguard. I could have bought a revolver.'
'He's not real. God damn it! Half of him was your idea.'
That,' returned MacDunlap with heat, 'is libel. And what do you mean, he's not real? When he introduced himself, I took three liver pills at once and he didn't disappear. Do you know what three pills are? Three pills, the kind I've got (the doctor should only drop dead), could make an elephant disappear - if he weren't real. I know.'
Graham said wearily, 'Just the same, he exists only in my mind.'
'In your mind, I know he exists. Your mind should be investigated by the Pure Food and Drugs Act.'
The several polite rejoinders that occurred simultaneously to Graham were dismissed almost immediately as containing too great a proportion of pithy Anglo-Saxon expletives. After all -ha, ha - a publisher is a publisher however Anglo-Saxony he may be.
Graham said, 'The question arises, then, how we're to get rid of de Meister.'
'Get rid of de Meister?' MacDunlap jerked the glasses off his nose in his sudden start, and caught them in one hand. His voice thickened with emotion. 'Who wants to get rid of him?'
'Do you want him around?'
'God forbid,' MacDunlap said between shudders. 'Next to him, my brother-in-law is an angel.'
'He has no business outside my books.'
'For my part, he has no business inside them. Since I started reading your manuscripts, my doctor added kidney pills and cough syrups to my medicines.' He looked at his watch, and took a kidney pill. 'My worst enemy should be a book publisher only a year.'
'Then why,' asked Graham patiently, 'don't you want to get rid of de Meister?'
'Because he is publicity.'
Graham stared blankly.
'Look! What other writer has a real detective? All the others are fictional. Everyone knows that. But yours - yours is real. We can let him solve cases and have big newspaper write-ups. He'll make the Police Department look silly. He'll make -'
'That,' interrupted Graham, categorically, 'is by all odds the most obscene proposal I have ever had my ears manured with.'
'It will make money.'
'Money isn't everything.'
'Name one thing it isn'tÖShh!' He kicked a near-fracture
into Graham's left ankle and rose to his feet with a convulsive smile, 'Mr. de Meister!'
'Sorry, old dear,' came a lethargic voice. 'Cou'dn't quite make it, you know. Loads of engagements. Must have been most borin' for you.'
Graham Dom's ears quivered spasmodically. He looked over his shoulder and reeled backward as far as a person could reel while in a sitting position. Reginald de Meister had sprouted a monocle since his last visitation, and his monocular glance was calculated to freeze blood.
De Meister's greeting was casual. 'My dear Watson! So glad to meet you. Overjoyed deucedly.'
'Why don't you go to hell?' Graham asked curiously.
'My dear fellow. Oh, my dear fellow.'
MacDunlap crackled, 'That's what I like. Jokes! Fun! Makes everything pleasant to start with. Now shall we get down to business?'
'Certainly. The dinner is on the way, I trust? Then I'll just order a bottle of wine. The usual, Henry.' The waiter ceased hovering, flew away, and skimmed back with a bottle that opened and gurgled into a glass.
De Meister sipped delicately, 'So nice of you, old chap, to make me a habitue of this place in your stories. It holds true even now, and it is most convenient. The waiters all know me. Mr. MacDunlap, I take it you have convinced Mr. Dorn of the necessity of continuing the de Meister stories."
'Yes,' said MacDunlap.
'No,' said Graham.
'Don't mind him,' said MacDunlap. 'He's temperamental. You know these authors.'
'Don't mind him,' said Graham. 'He's microcephalic. You know these publishers.'
'Look, old chappie. I take it MacDunlap hasn't pointed out to you the unpleasanter side of acting stubborn.'
'For instance what, old stinkie?' asked Graham, courteously.
'Well, have you ever been haunted?'
'Like coming behind me and saying, Boo!"
'My dear fellow, I say. I'm much more subtle than that. I can really haunt one in modern, up-to-date methods. For instance, have you ever had your individuality submerged?'
He snickered.
There was something familiar about that snicker. Graham suddenly remembered. It was on page 103 of Murder Rides the Range:
His lazy eyelids flicked down and up. He laughed lightly and melodiously, and though he said not a word, Hank Marslowe cowered. There was hidden menace and hidden power in that light laugh, and somehow the burly rancher did not dare reach for his guns.
To Graham it still sounded like a nasty snicker, but he cowered, and did not dare reach for his guns.
MacDunlap plunged through the hole the momentary silence had created.
'You see, Graham. Why play around with ghosts? Ghosts aren't reasonable things. They're not human! If it's more royalties, you want -'
Graham fired up. 'Will you refrain from speaking of money? From now on, I write only great novels of tearing human emotions.'
MacDunlap's flushed face changed suddenly.
'No,' he said.
'In fact, to change the subject just a moment' - and Graham's tone became surpassingly sweet, as the words got all sticky with maple syrup - 'I have a manuscript here for you to look at.'
He grasped the perspiring MacDunlap by the lapel firmly. 'It is a novel that is the work of five years. A novel that will grip you with its intensity. A novel that will shake you to the core of your being. A novel that will open a new world. A novel that will -'
'No,' said MacDunlap.
'A novel that will blast the falseness of this world. A novel that pierces to the truth. A novel-'
MacDunlap, being able to stretch his hand no higher, took the manuscript.
'No,' he said.
'Why the bloody hell don't you read it?' inquired Graham.
'Now?'
'Well, start it.'
'Look, supposing I read it tomorrow, or even the next day. I have to take my cough syrup now.'
'You haven't coughed once since I got here.'
'I'll let you know immediately -'
'This,' said Graham, 'is the first page. Why don't you begin -it? It will grip you instantly.'
MacDunlap read two paragraphs and said, 'Is this laid in a coal-mining town?'
'Yes.'
'Then I can't read it. I'm allergic to coal dust.'
'But it's not real coal dust, Macldiot.'
'That,' pointed out MacDunlap, 'is what you said about de Meister.'
Reginald de Meister tapped a cigarette carefully on the back of his hand in a subtle manner which Graham immediately recognized as betokening a sudden decision.
'That is all devastatin'ly borin', you know. Not quite gettin' to the point, you might say. Go ahead, MacDunlap, this is no time for half measures.'
MacDunlap girded his spiritual loins and said, 'All right Mister Dorn, with you it's no use being nice. Instead of de Meister, I'm getting coal dust. Instead of the best publicity in fifty years, I'm getting social significance. All right, Mister Smartaleck Dorn, if in one week you don't come to terms with me, good terms, you will be blacklisted in every reputable publishing firm in the United States and foreign parts.' He shook his finger and added in a shout, 'Including Scandinavian.'
Graham Dorn laughed lightly, 'Pish,' he said, 'tush. I happen to be an officer of the Author's Union, and if you try to push me around I'll have you blacklisted. How do you like that?'
'I like it fine. Because supposing I can prove you're a plagiarist.'
'Me,' gasped Graham, recovering narrowly from merry suffocation. 'Me, the most original writer of the decade.'
'Is that so? And maybe you don't remember that in each case you write up, you casually mention de Meister's notebooks on previous cases.'
'So what?'
'So he has them. Reginald, my boy, show Mister Dorn your notebook of your last case. - You see that. That's Mystery of the Milestones and it has, in detail, every incident in your book - and dated the year before the book was published. Very authentic.'
'Again so what?'
'Have you maybe got the right to copy his notebook and call it an original murder mystery?'
'Why, you case of mental poliomyelitis, that notebook is my invention.'
'Who says so? It's de Meister's handwriting, as any expert can prove. And maybe you have a piece of paper, some little contract or agreement, you know, that gives you the right to use his notebooks?'
'How can I have an agreement with a mythical personage?'
'What mythical personage?'
'You and I know de Meister doesn't exist.'
'Ah, but does the jury know? When I testify that I took three strong liver pills and he didn't disappear, what twelve men will say he doesn't exist?'
'This is blackmail.'
'Certainly. I'll give you a week. Or in other words, seven days.'
Graham Dorn turned desperately to de Meister. 'You're in on this, too. In my books I give you the keenest sense of honor. Is this honorable?'
De Meister shrugged. 'My dear fellow. All this - and haunting, too."
Graham rose.
'Where are you going?'
'Home to write you a letter.' Graham's brows beetled defiantly. 'And this time I'll mail it. I'm not giving in. I'll fight to the last ditch. And, de Meister, you let loose with one single little haunt and I'll rip your head out of its socket and spurt the blood all over MacDunlap's new suit.'
He stalked out, and as he disappeared through the door, de Meister disappeared through nothing at all.
MacDunlap let out a soft yelp and then took a liver pill, a kidney pill, and a tablespoon of cough syrup in rapid succession.
Graham Dorn sat in June's front parlor, and having long since consumed his fingernails, was starting on the first knuckles.
June, at the moment, was not present, and this, Graham felt, was just as well. A dear girl; in fact, a dear, sweet girl. But his mind was not on her.
It was concerned instead with a miasmic series of flashbacks over the preceding six days:
óSay, Graham, I met your side-kick at the club yesterday. You know, de Meister. Got an awful shock. I always had the idea he was a sort of Sherlock Holmes that didn't exist. That's one on me, boy. Didn't know - Hey, where are you going?
óHey, Dorn, I hear your boss de Meister is back in town. Ought to have material for more stories soon. You're lucky you've got someone to grind out your plots ready-made - Huh? Well, good-bye.
óWhy, Graham, darling, wherever were you last night? Ann's affair didn't get anywhere without you; or at least, it wouldn't have, if it hadn't been for Reggie de Meister. He asked after you; but then, I guess he felt lost without his Wat son. It must feel wonderful to Watson for such- Mister Dorn! And the same to you, sir!
óYou put one over on me. I thought you made up those wild things. Well, truth is stranger than fiction, ha, ha!
Police officials deny that the famous amateur criminologist Reginald tie Meister has interested himself in this case. Mr. de Meister himself could not be reached by our reporters for comment. Mr. de Meister is best known to the public for his brilliant solutions to over a dozen crimes, as chronicled in fiction form by his so-called 'Watson,' Mr. Grayle Doone.
Graham quivered and his arms trembled in an awful desire for blood. De Meister was haunting him - but good. He was losing his individuality, exactly as had been threatened.
It gradually dawned upon Graham that the monotonous ringing noise he heard was not in his head, but, on the contrary, from the front door.
Such seemed likewise the opinion of Miss June Billings, whose piercing call shot down the stairs and biffed Graham a sharp uppercut to the ear-drums.
'Hey, dope, see who's at the front door, before the vibration tears the house down. I'll be down in half an hour.'
'Yes, dear!'
Graham shuffled his way to the front door and opened it.
'Ah, there. Greetin's,' said de Meister, and brushed past.
.Graham's dull eyes stared, and then fired high, as an animal snarl burst from his lips. He took up that gorilla posture, so comforting to red-blooded American males at moments like this, and circled the slightly-confused detective.
'My dear fellow, are you ill?'
'I,' explained Graham, 'am not ill, but you will soon be past all interest in that, for I am going to bathe my hands in your heart's reddest blood.'
'But I say, you'll only have to wash them afterwards. It would be such an obvious clue, wouldn't it?'
'Enough of this gay banter. Have you any last words?'
'Not particularly.'
'It's just as well. I'm not interested in your last words."
He thundered into action, bearing down upon the unfortunate de Meister like a bull elephant. De Meister faded to the left, shot out an arm and a foot, and Graham described a parabolic arc that ended in the total destruction of an end table, a vase of flowers, a fish-bowl, and a five-foot section of wall.
Graham blinked, and brushed away a curious goldfish from his left eyebrow.
'My dear fellow,' murmured de Meister, 'oh, my dear fellow.'
Too late, Graham remembered that passage in Pistol Parade:
De Meister's arms were whipcord lightning, as with sure, rapid thrusts, he rendered the two thugs helpless. Not by brute force, but by his expert knowledge of judo, he defeated them easily without hastening his breath. The thugs groaned in pain.
Graham groaned in pain.
He lifted his right thigh an inch or so to let his femur slip back into place.
'Hadn't you better get up, old chap?'
'I will stay here,' said Graham with dignity, 'and contemplate the floor in profile view, until such time as it suits me or until such time as I find myself capable of moving a muscle. I don't care which. And now, before I proceed to take further measures with you, what the hell do you want?'
Reginald de Meister adjusted his monocle to a nicety. 'You know, I suppose, that MacDunlap's ultimatum expires tomorrow?'
'And you and he with it, I trust.'
'You will not reconsider.'
'Ha!'
'Really,' de Meister sighed, 'this is borin' no end. You have made things comfortable for me in this world. After all, in your books you've made me well-known in all the clubs and better restaurants, the bosom friend, y'know, of the mayor and commissioner of police, the owner of a Park Avenue penthouse and a magnificent art collection. And it all lingers over, old chap. Really quite affectin'.'
'It is remarkable,' mused Graham, 'the intensity with which I am not listening and the distinctness with which I do not hear a word you say.'
'Still,' said de Meister, 'there is no denyin' my book world suits me better. It is somehow more fascinatin', freer from dull logic, more apart from the necessities of the world. In short, I must go back, and to active participation. You have till tomorrow! '
Graham hummed a gay little tune with flat little notes.
'Is this a new threat, de Meister?'
'It is the old threat intensified. I'm going to rob you of every vestige of your personality. And eventually public oninion will force you to write as, to paraphrase you, de Meister's Compleat Stooge. Did you see the name the newspaper chappies pinned on you today, old man?'
'Yes, Mr. Filthy de Meister, and did you read a half-column item on page ten in the same paper. I'll read it for you: "Noted Criminologist in 1-A. Will be inducted shortly draft board says."'
For a moment, de Meister said and did nothing. And then, one after another, he did the following things: removed his monocle slowly, sat down heavily, rubbed his chin abstractedly, and lit a cigarette after long and careful tamping. Each of these, Graham Dorn's trained authorial eye recognized as singly representing perturbation and distress on the part of his character.
And never, in any of his books, did Graham remember a time when de Meister had gone through all four consecutively.
Finally, de Meister spoke. 'Why you had to bring up draft registrations in your last book, I really don't know. This urge to be topical; this fiendish desire to be up to the minute with the news is the curse of the mystery novel. A true mystery is timeless; should have no relation to current events; should-'
'There is one way,' said Graham, 'to escape induction -'
'You might at least have mentioned a deferred classification on some vital ground.'
There is one way,' said Graham, 'to escape induction -'
'Criminal negligence,' said de Meister.
'Look! Go back to the books and you'll never be filled with lead.'
'Write them and I'll do it.'
'Think of the war.'
'Think of your ego.'
Two strong men stood face to face (or would have, if Graham weren't still horizontal) and neither flinched.
Impasse!
And the sweet, feminine voice of June Billings interrupted and snapped the tension:
'May I ask, Graham Dorn, what you are doing on the floor. It's been swept today and you're not complimenting me by attempting to improve the job.'
'I am not sweeping the floor. If you looked carefully,' replied Graham gently, 'you would see that your own adored fiance is lying here a mass of bruises and a hotbed of pains and aches.'
'You've ruined my end table!'
'I've broken my leg.'
'And my best lamp.'
'And two ribs.'
'And my fishbowl.'
'And my Adam's apple.'
'And you haven't introduced your friend,'
'And my cervical verte- What friend?'
'This friend.'
'Friend! Ha!' And a mist came over his eyes. She was so young, so fragile to come into contact with hard, brutal facts of life. 'This,' he muttered brokenly, 'is Reginald de Meister.'
De Meister at this point broke a cigarette sharply in two, a gesture pregnant with the deepest emotion.
June said slowly. 'Why - why, you're different from what I had thought.'
'How had you expected me to look?' asked de Meister, in soft, thrilling tones.
'I don't know. Differently than you do - from the stories I heard.'
'You remind me, somehow, Miss Billings, of Letitia Reynolds.'
'I think so. Graham said he drew her from me.'
'A very poor imitation, Miss Billings. Devastatin'ly poor.'
They were six inches apart now, eyes fixed with a mutual glue, and Graham yelled sharply. He sprang upright as memory smote^him a nasty smite on the forehead.
A passage from Case of the Muddy Overshoe occurred to him. Likewise one from The Primrose Murders. Also one from The Tragedy of Hartley Manor, Death of a Hunter, White Scorpion and, to put it in a small nutshell, from every one of the others.
The passage read:
There was a certain fascination about de Meister that appealed irresistibly to women.
And June Billings was - as it had often, in Graham's idler moments, occurred to him - a woman.
And fascination simply gooed out of her ears and coated the floor six inches deep.
'Get out of this room, June,' he ordered.
'I will not.'
'There is something I must discuss with Mr. de Meister, man to man. I demand that you leave this room.'
'Please go, Miss Billings,' said de Meister.
June hesitated, and in a very small voice said, 'Very well.'
'Hold on,' shouted Graham. 'Don't let him order you about, I demand that you stay.'
She closed the door very gently behind her.
The two men faced each other. There was that in either pair of eyes that indicated a strong man brought to bay. There was stubborn, undying antagonism; no quarter; no compromise. It was exactly the sort of situation Graham Dorn always presented his readers with, when two strong men fought for one hand, one heart, one girl.
The two said simultaneously, 'Let's make a deal!'
Graham said, 'You have convinced me, Reggie. Our public needs us. Tomorrow I shall begin another de Meister story. Let us shake hands and forget the past.'
De Meister struggled with his emotion. He laid his hand on Graham's lapel, 'My dear fellow, it is I who have been convinced by your logic. I can't allow you to sacrifice yourself for me. There are great things in you that must be brought out. Write your coal-mining novels. They count, not I.'
'I couldn't, old chap. Not after all you've done for me, and all you've meant to me. Tomorrow we start anew.'
'Graham, my - my spiritual father, I couldn't allow it. Do you think I have no feelings, filial feelings -in a spiritual sort of way.'
'But the war, think of the war. Mangled limbs. Blood. All that.'
'I must stay. My country needs me.'
'But if I stop writing, eventually you will stop existing. I can't allow that'
'Oh, that!' De Meister laughed with a careless elegance. 'Things have changed since. So many people believe in my existence now that my grip upon actual existence has become too firm to be broken. I don't have to worry about Limbo any more.'
'Oh.' Graham clenched his teeth and spoke in searing sibilants: 'So that's your scheme, you snake. Do you suppose I don't see you're stuck on June?'
'Look here, old chap,' said de Meister haughtily. 'I can't permit you to speak slightingly of a true and honest love. I love June and she loves me -I know it. And if you're going to be stuffy and Victorian about it, you can swallow some nitroglycerine and tap yourself with a hammer.'
'I'll nitro-glycerine you! Because I'm going home tonight and beginning another de Meister story. You'll be part of it and you'll get back into it, and what do you think of that?'
'Nothing, because you can't write another de Meister story. I'm too real now, and you can't control me just like that. And what do you think of that?'
It took Graham Dorn a week to make up his mind what to think of that, and then his thoughts were completely and start-lingly unprintable.
In fact, it was impossible to write.
That is, startling ideas occurred to him for great novels, emotional dramas, epic poems, brilliant essays - but he couldn't write anything about Reginald de Meister.
The typewriter was simply fresh out of Capital R's.
Graham wept, cursed, tore his hair, and anointed his finger tips with liniment. He tried typewriter, pen, pencil, crayon, charcoal and blood.
He could not write.
The doorbell rang, and Graham threw it open.
MacDunlap stumbled in, falling over the first drifts of torn paper directly into Graham's arms.
Graham let him drop. 'Ha!' he said, with frozen dignity.
'My heart!' said MacDunlap, and fumbled for his liver pills.
'Don't die there,' suggested Graham, courteously. 'The management won't permit me to drop human flesh into the incinerator.'
'Graham, my boy,' MacDunlap said, emotionally, 'no more ultimatums! No more threats! I come now to appeal to your finer feelings, Graham' - he went through a slight choking interlude - 'I love you like a son. This skunk de Meister must disappear. You must write more de Meister stories for my sake. Graham - I will tell you something in private. My wife is in love with this detective. She tells me I am not romantic. I! Not romantic! Can you understand it?'
'I can,' was the tragic response. 'He fascinates all women.'
'With that face? With that monocle?'
'It says so in all my books.'
MacDunlap stiffened. 'Ah ha. You again. Dope! If only you ever stopped long enough to let your mind know what your typewriter was saying.'
'You insisted. Feminine trade.' Graham didn't care any more. Women! He snickered bitterly. Nothing wrong with any of them that a block-buster wouldn't fix.
MacDunlap hemmed. 'Well, feminine trade. Very necessary. - But Graham, what shall I do? It's not only my wife. She owns fifty shares in MacDunlap, Inc. in her own name. If she leaves me, I lose control. Think of it, Graham. The catastrophe to the publishing world.'
'Grew, old chap,' Graham sighed a sigh so deep, his toenails quivered sympathetically. 'I might as well tell you. June, my fiancee, you know, loves this worm. And he loves her because she is the prototype of Letitia Reynolds."
'The what of Letitia?' asked MacDunlap, vaguely suspecting an insult.
'Never mind. My life is ruined.' He smiled bravely and choked back the unmanly tears, after the first two had dripped off the end of his nose.
'My poor boy!' The two gripped hands convulsively.
'Caught in a vise by this foul monster,' said Graham.
'Trapped like a German in Russia,' said MacDunlap.
'Victim of an inhuman fiend,' said Graham.
'Exactly,' said MacDunlap. He wrung Graham's hand as if he were milking a cow. 'You've got to write de Meister stories and get him back where, next to Hell, he most belongs. Right?'
'Right! But there's one little catch.'
'What?'
'I can't write. He's so real now, I can't put him into a book."
MacDunlap caught the significance of the massed drifts of used paper on the floor. He held his head and groaned, 'My corporation! My wife!'
'There's always the Army,' said Graham.
MacDunlap looked up. 'What about Death on the Third Deck, the novel I rejected three weeks ago?'
'That doesn't count. It's past history. It's already affected him.'
'Without being published?'
'Sure. That's the story I mentioned his draft board in. The one that put him in 1 -A.'
'I could think of better places to put him.'
'MacDunlap!' Graham Dorn jumped up, and grappled MacDunlap's lapel. 'Maybe it can be revised.'
MacDunlap coughed hackingly, and stifled out a dim grunt.
'We can put anything we want into it."
MacDunlap choked a bit.
'We can fix things up.'
MacDunlap turned blue in the face.
Graham shook the lapel and everything thereto attached, 'Say something, won't you?'
MacDunlap wrenched away and took a tablespoon of cough syrup. He held his hand over his heart and patted it a bit. He shook his head and gestured with his eyebrows.
Graham shrugged. 'Well, if you just want to be sullen, go ahead. I'll revise it without you.'
He located the manuscript and tried his fingers gingerly on the typewriter. They went smoothly, with practically no creaking at the joints. He put on speed, more speed, and then went into his usual race, with the portable jouncing along merrily under the accustomed head of steam.
'It's working,' he shouted. 'I can't write new stories, but I can revise old, unpublished ones.'
MacDunlap watched over his shoulder. He breathed only at odd moments.
'Faster,' said MacDunlap, 'faster!'
'Faster than thirty-five?' said Graham, sternly. 'OPA* forbid! Five more minutes.'
'Will he be there?'
'He's always there. He's been at her house every evening this week.' He spat out the fine ivory dust into which he had ground the last inch of his incisors. 'But God help you if your secretary falls down on the job.'
'My boy, on my secretary you can depend.'
'She's got to read that revision by nine.'
'If she doesn't drop dead.'
'With my luck, she will. Will she believe it?'
'Every word. She's seen de Meister. She knows he exists.'
Brakes screeched, and Graham's soul cringed in sympathy with every molecule of rubber frictioned off the tires.
He bounded up the stairs, MacDunlap hobbling after.
He rang the bell and burst in at the door. Reginald de
* The Office of Price Administration was in charge of gasoline rationing at this period. Remember 'A' stickers? D.R.B.
Meister standing directly inside received the full impact of a pointing finger, and only a rapid backward movement of the head kept him from becoming a one-eyed mythical character.
June Billings stood aside, silent and uncomfortable.
'Reginald de Meister,' growled Graham, in sinister tones, 'prepare to meet your doom.'
'Oh, boy,' said MacDunlap, 'are you going to get it.'
'And to what,' asked de Meister, 'am I indebted for your dramatic but unilluminatin' statement? Confusin', don't you know.' He lit a cigarette with a fine gesture and smiled.
'Hello, Gramie,' said June, tearfully.
'Scram, vile woman.'
June sniffed. She felt like a heroine out of a book, torn by her own emotions. Naturally, she was having the time of her life.
So she let the tears dribble and looked forlorn.
To return to the subject, what is this all about?" asked de Meister, wearily.
'I have rewritten Death on the Third Deck.'
'Well?'
'The revision,' continued Graham, 'is at present in the hands of MacDunlap's secretary, a girl on the style of Miss Billings, my fiancee that was. That is, she is a girl who aspires to the status of a moron, but has not yet quite attained it. She'll believe every word.'
'Well?'
Graham's voice grew ominous, 'You remember, perhaps, Sancha Rodriguez?'
For the first time, Reginald de Meister shuddered. He caught his cigarette as it dropped. 'She was killed by Sam Blake in the sixth chapter. She was in love with me. Really, old fellow, what messes you get me into.'
'Not half the mess you're in now, old chap. Sancha Rodriguez did not die in the revision.'
'Die!' came a sharp, but clear female voice. 'I'll show him if I died. And where have you been this last month, you two-crosser?'
De Meister did not catch his cigarette this time. He didn't even try. He recognized the apparition. To an unprejudiced observer, it might have been merely a svelte Latin girl equipped with dark, flashing eyes, and long, glittering fingernails, but to de Meister, it was Sancha Rodriguez - undead!
MacDunlap's secretary had read and believed.
'Miss Rodriguez,' throbbed de Meister, charmingly, 'how fascinatin' to see you.'
'Mrs. de Meister to you, you double-timer, you two-crosser, you scum of the ground, you scorpion of the grass. And who is this woman?'
June retreated with dignity behind the nearest chair.
'Mrs. de Meister,' said Reginald pleadingly, and turned helplessly to Graham Dorn.
'Oh, you have forgotten, have you, you smooth talker, you low dog. I'll show you what it means to deceive a weak woman. I'll make you mince-meat with my fingernails.'
De Meister back-pedaled furiously. 'But darling -'
'Don't you make sweet talk. What are you doing with this woman?'
'But, darling -'
'Don't give me any explanation. What are you doing with this woman?'
'But darling-'
'Shut up! What are you doing with this woman?'
Reginald de Meister was up in a corner, and Mrs. de Meister shook her fists at him. 'Answer me!'
De Meister disappeared.
Mrs. de Meister disappeared right after him.
June Billings collapsed into real tears.
Graham Dorn folded his arms and looked sternly at her.
MacDunlap rubbed his hands and took a kidney pill.
'It wasn't my fault, Gramie,' said June. 'You said in your books he fascinated all women, so I couldn't help it. Deep inside, I hated him all along. You believe me, don't you?'
'A likely story!' said Graham, sitting down next to her on the sofa. 'A likely story. But I forgive you, maybe.'
MacDunlap said tremulously, 'My boy, you have saved my stocks. Also, my wife, of course. And remember - you promised me one de Meister story each year.'
Graham gritted, 'Just one, and I'll henpeck him to death, and keep one unpublished story forever on hand, just in case. And you're publishing my novel, aren't you, Grew, old boy?'
'Glug,' said MacDunlap.
'Aren't you?'
'Yes, Graham. Of course, Graham. Definitely, Graham. Positively, Graham.'
Then leave us now. There are matters of importance I must discuss with my fiancee.'
MacDunlap smiled and tiptoed out the door.
Ah, love, love, he mused, as he took a liver pill and followed it up by a cough-syrup chaser.



***



I might make two points about 'Author! Author!' It seems to me that I was rather easier about handling romance in this story than in any previous one. Perhaps this is a reflection of the fact that it was the first story I ever wrote as a married man.
Secondly, there are the very dated references to rationing, the draft, and other social phenomena much on the mind of anyone living through Worjd War II. I had warned Bensen of the existence of these references and of the inability of getting them out of the story by revision since they were integral to the plot. Bensen, however, shrugged them off and in his short introduction to the story said to.the readers, 'And don't worry about the references to the OP A and Selective Service - consider them as part of the historical setting, just as you would a bodkin or a furbelow in a story of an earlier time.'
And I second that statement here.
Had I rested on the pink cloud of gratification that came with the sale of 'Author! Author!' for a few months, the death of Unknown might have disheartened me. It might have seemed to prove that I was not fated to reign ite my career after all, and perhaps - again - everything would have turned out differently.
However, within three weeks of the sale I was at the typewriter again. The new story was 'Death Sentence' and it was science fiction. Writing was still slow work; seven weeks to do a 7,200-word story. On June 29, 1943, however, I sent it off to Campbell, and on July 8, it was accepted - one and a quarter cents per word again.
This meant that when the news of Unknown's demise arrived, it was cushioned by the fact that I already had another story written and sold.






Death Sentence [3]


Brand Gorla smiled uncomfortably, 'These things exaggerate, you know.'
'No, no, no!' The little man's albino-pink eyes snapped. 'Dorlis was great when no human had ever entered the Vegan System. It was the capital of a Galactic Confederation greater than ours.'
'Well, then, let's say it was an ancient capital. I'll admit that and leave the rest to an archaeologist.'
'Archaeologists are no use. What I've discovered needs a specialist in its own field. And you're on the Board.'
Brand Gorla looked doubtful. He remembered Theo Realo in senior year - a little white misfit of a human who skulked somewhere in the background of his reminiscences. It had been a long time ago, but the albino had been queer. That was easy to remember. And he was still queer.
'I'll try to help,' Brand said, 'if you'll tell me what you want.'
Theor watched intently, 'I want you to place certain facts before the Board. Will you promise that?'
Brand hedged, 'Even if I help you along, Theor, I'll have to remind you that I'm junior member of the Psychological Board. I haven't much influence.'
'You must do your best. The facts will speak for themselves.' The albino's hands were trembling.
'Go ahead.' Brand resigned himself. The man was an old school fellow. You couldn't be too arbitrary about things.
Brand Gorla leaned back and relaxed. The light of Arcturus shone through the ceiling-high windows, diffused and mellowed by the polarizing glass. Even this diluted version of sunlight was too much for the pink eyes of the other, and he shaded his eyes as he spoke.
'I've lived on Dorlis twenty-five years, Brand,' he said, 'I've poked into places no one today knew existed, and I've found things. Dorlis was the scientific and cultural capital of a civilization greater than ours. Yes it was, and particularly in psychology.'
'Things in the past always seem greater.' Brand condescended a smile. 'There is a theorem to that effect which you'll find in any elementary text. Freshmen invariably call it the 'GOD Theorem.' Stands for "Good-Old-Days," you know. But go on.'
Theor frowned at the digression. He hid the beginning of a sneer, 'You can always dismiss an uncomfortable fact by pinning a dowdy label to it. But tell me this. What do you know of Psychological Engineering?'
Brand shrugged, 'No such thing. Anyway, not in the strict mathematical sense. All propaganda and advertising is a crude form of hit-and-miss Psych Engineering - and pretty effective sometimes. Maybe that's what you mean.'
'Not at all. I mean actual experimentation, with masses of people, under controlled conditions, and over a period of years.'
'Such things have been discussed. It's not feasible in practice. Our social structure couldn't stand much of it, and we don't know enough to set up effective controls.'
Theor suppressed excitement, 'But the ancients did know enough. And they did set up controls.'
Brand considered phlegmatically, 'Startling and interesting, but how do you know?'
'Because I found the documents relating to it.' He paused breathlessly. 'An entire planet, Brand. A complete world picked to suit, peopled with beings under strict control from every angle. Studied, and charted, and experimented upon. Don't you get the picture?'
Brand noted none of the usual stigmata of mental uncon-trol. A closer investigation, perhaps -
He said evenly, 'You must have been misled. It's thoroughly impossible. You can't control humans like that. Too many variables.'
'And that's the point, Brand. They weren't humans.'
'What?'
'They were robots, positronic robots. A whole world of them, Brand, with nothing to do but live and react and be observed by a set of psychologists that were real psychologists.'
That's mad!'
'I have proof - because that robot world still exists. The First Confederation went to pieces, but that robot world kept on going. It still exists.'
'And how do you know?'
Theor Realo stood up. 'Because I've been there these last twenty-five years!'
The Board Master threw his formal red-edged gown aside and reached into a pocket for a long, gnarled and decidedly unofficial cigar.
'Preposterous,' he grunted, 'and thoroughly insane.'
'Exactly,' said Brand, 'and I can't spring it on the Board just like that. They wouldn't listen. I've got to get this across to you first, and then, if you can put your authority behind it -'
'Oh, nuts? I never heard anything as - Who is the fellow?'
Brand sighed, 'A crank, I'll admit that. He was in my class at Arcturus U. and a crack-pot albino even then. Maladjusted as the devil, hipped on ancient history, and just the kind that gets an idea and goes through with it by plain, dumb plugging. He's poked about in Dorlis for twenty-five years, he says. He's got the complete records of practically an entire civilization.'
The Board Master puffed furiously. 'Yeah, I know. In the telestat serials, the brilliant amateur always uncovers the great things. The free lance. The lone wolf. Nuts! Have you consulted the Department of Archaeology?'
'Certainly. And the result was interesting. No one bothers with Dorlis. This isn't just ancient history, you see. It's a matter of fifteen thousand years. It's practically myth. Reputable archaeologists don't waste too much time with it. It's just the thing a book-struck layman with a single-track mind would uncover. After this, of course, if the business turns out right, Dorlis will become an archaeologist's paradise.'
The Board Master screwed his homely face into an appalling grimace. 'It's very unflattering to the ego. If there's any truth in all this, the so-called First Confederation must have had a grasp of psychology so far past ours, as to make us out to be blithering imbeciles. Too, they'd have to build positronic robots that would be about seventy-five orders of magnitude above anything we've even blueprinted. Galaxy! Think of the mathematics involved.'
'Look, sir, I've consulted just about everybody. I wouldn't bring this thing to you if I weren't certain that I had every angle checked. I went to Blak just about the first thing, and he's consultant mathematician to United Robots. He says there's no limit to these things. Given the time, the money, and the advance in psychology - get that - robots like that could be built right now.'
'What proof has he?'
'Who, Blak?'
'No, no! Your friend. The albino. You said he had papers.'
'He has. I've got them here. He's got documents - and there's no denying their antiquity. I've had that checked every way from Sunday. I can't read them, of course. I don't know if anyone can, except Theor Realo.'
'That's stacking the deck, isn't it? We have to take his say-so.'
'Yes, in a way. But he doesn't claim to be able to decipher more than portions. He says it is related to ancient Centaurian, and I've put linguists to work on it. It can be cracked and if his translation isn't accurate, we'll know about it."
'All right. Let's see it.'
Brand Gorla brought out the plastic-mounted documents. The Board Master tossed them aside and reached for the translation. Smoke billowed as he read.
'Humph,' was his comment. 'Further details are on Dorlis, I suppose.'
'Theor claims that there are some hundred to two hundred tons of blueprints altogether, on the brain plan of the posi-tronic robots alone. They're still there in the original vault. But that's the least of it. He's been on the robot world itself. He's got photocasts, teletype recordings, all sorts of details. They're not integrated, and obviously the work of a layman who knows next to nothing about psychology. Even so, he's managed to get enough data to prove pretty conclusively that the world he was on wasn'tÖ uhÖ natural.'
'You've got that with you, too.'
'All of it. Most of it's on microfilm, but I've brought the projector. Here are your eyepieces.'
An hour later, the Board Master said, 'I'll call a Board Meeting tomorrow and push this through.'
Brand Gorla grinned tightly, 'We'll send a commission to Dorlis?'
'When,' said the Board Master dryly, 'and if we can get an appropriation out of the University for such an affair. Leave this material with me for the while, please. I want to study it a
little more.'
Theoretically, the Governmental Department of Science and Technology exercises administrative control over all scientific investigation. Actually, however, the pure research groups of the large universities are thoroughly autonomous bodies, and, as a general rule, the Government does not care to dispute that. But a general rule is not necessarily a universal rule.
And so, although the Board Master scowled and fumed and swore, there was no way of refusing Wynne Murry an interview. To give Murry his complete title, he was under secretary in charge of psychology, psychopathy and mental technology. And he was a pretty fair psychologist in his own right.
So the Board Master might glare, but that was all.
Secretary Murry ignored the glare cheerfully. He rubbed his long chin against the grain and said, 'It amounts to a case of insufficient information. Shall we put it that way?'
The Board Master said frigidly, 'I don't see what information you want. The government's say in university appropriations is purely advisory, and in this case, I might say, the advice is unwelcome.'
Murry shrugged, 'I have no quarrel with the appropriation. But you're not going to leave the planet without government permit. That's where the insufficient information comes in.'
'There is no information other than we've given you.'
'But things have leaked out. All this is childish and rather unnecessary secrecy.'
The old psychologist flushed. 'Secrecy! If you don't know the academic way of life, I can't help you. Investigations, especially those of major importance, aren't, and can't be, made public, until definite progress has been made. When we get back, we'll send you copies of whatever papers we publish.'
Murry shook his head, 'Uh-uh. Not enough. You're going to Dorlis, aren't you?'
'We've informed the Department of Science of that.'
'Why?'
'Why do you want to know?'
'Because it's big, or the Board Master wouldn't go himself, What's this about an older civilization and a world of robots?'
'Well, then, you know.'
'Only vague notions we've been able to scrabble up. I want the details.'
There are none that we know now. We won't know until we're on Dorlis.'
'Then I'm going with you.'
'What!'
'You see, I want the details, too.'
'Why?'
'Ah,' Murry unfolded his legs and stood up, 'now you're asking the questions. It's no use, now. I know that the universities aren't keen on government supervision; and I know that I can expect no willing help from any academic source. But, by Arcturus, I'm going to get help this time, and I don't care how you fight it. Your expedition is going nowhere, unless I go with you - representing the government.'
Dorlis, as a world, is not impressive. It's importance to Galactic economy is nil, its position far off the great trade routes, its natives backward and unenlightened, its history obscure. And yet somewhere in the heaps of rubble that clutter an ancient world, there is obscure evidence of an influx of flame and destruction that destroyed the Dorlis of an earlier day -the greater capital of a greater Federation.
And somewhere in that rubble, men of a newer world poked and probed and tried to understand.
The Board Master shook his head and then pushed back his grizzling hair. He hadn't shaved in a week.
'The trouble is,' he said, 'that we have no point of reference. The language can be broken, I suppose, but nothing can be done with the notation.'
'I think a great deal has been done.'
'Stabs in the dark! Guessing games based on the translations of your albino friend. I won't base any hopes on that.'
Brand said, 'Nuts! You spent two years on the Nimian Anomaly, and so far only two months on this, which happens to be a hundred thousand times the job. It's something else that's getting you.' He smiled grimly. 'It doesn't take a psychologist to see that the government man is in your hair.'
The Board Master bit the end off a cigar and spat it four feet. He said slowly, 'There are three things about the mule-headed idiot that make me sore. First, I don't like government interference. Second, I don't like a stranger sniffing about when we're on top of the biggest thing in the history of psychology. Third, what in the Galaxy does he want? What is he after?'
'I don't know.'
'What should he be after? Have you thought of it at all?'
'No. Frankly, I don't care. I'd ignore him if I were you.'
'You would,' said the Board Master violently. 'You would! You think the government's entrance into this affair need only be ignored. I suppose you know that this Murry calls himself a psychologist?'
'I know that.'
'And I suppose you know he's been displaying a devouring interest in all that we've been doing.'
That, I should say, would be natural.'
'Oh! And you know further-' His voice dropped with startling suddenness. 'All right, Murry's at the door. Take it easy.'
Wynne Murry grinned a greeting, but the Board Master nodded unsmilingly.
'Well, sir,' said Murry bluffly, 'do you know I've been on my feet for forty-eight hours? You've got something here. Something big.'
'Thank you.'
'No, no. I'm serious. The robot world exists.'
'Did you think it didn't?'
The secretary shrugged amiably. 'One has a certain natural skepticism. What are your future plans?'
'Why do you ask?' The Board Master grunted his words as if they were being squeezed out singly.
To see if they jibe with my own.'
'And what are your own?"
'The secretary smiled. 'No, no. You take precedence. How long do you intend staying here?'
'As long as it takes to make a fair beginning on the documents involved.'
'That's no answer. What do you mean by a fair beginning?'
'I haven't the slightest idea. It might take years.'
'Oh, damnation.'
The Board Master raised his eyebrows and said nothing.
The secretary looked at his nails. 'I take it you know the location of this robot world.'
'Naturally. Theor Realo was there. His information up to now has proven very accurate.'
'That's right. The albino. Well, why not go there?'
'Go there! Impossible!'
'May I ask why?'
'Look,' said the Board Master with restrained impatience, 'you're not here by our invitation, and we're not asking you to dictate our course of actions, but just to show you that I'm not looking for a fight, I'll give you a little metaphorical treatment of our case. Suppose we were presented with a huge and complicated machine, composed of principles and materials of which we knew next to nothing. It is so vast we can't even make out the relationship of the parts, let alone the purpose of the whole. Now, would you advise me to begin attacking the delicate mysterious moving parts of the machine with a detonating ray before I know what it's all about?'
'I see your point, of course, but you're becoming a mystic. The metaphor is farfetched.'
'Not at all. These positronic robots were constructed along lines we know nothing of as yet and were intended to follow lines with which we are entirely unacquainted. About the only thing we know is that the robots were put aside in complete isolation, to work out their destiny by themselves. To ruin that isolation would be to ruin the experiment. If we go there in a body, introducing new, unforeseen factors, inducing unintended reactions, everything is ruined. The littlest disturbance -'
'Poppycock! Theor Realo has already gone there.'
The Board Master lost his temper suddenly. 'Don't you suppose I know that? Do you suppose it would ever have happened if that cursed albino hadn't been an ignorant fanatic without any knowledge of psychology at all? Galaxy knows what the idiot has done in the way of damage.'
There was a silence. The secretary clicked his teeth with a
thoughtful fingernail. 'I don't knowÖ I don't know. But I've
got to find out. And I can't wait years.'
He left, and the Board Master turned seethingly to Brand, 'And how are we going to stop him from going to the robot world if'he wants to?'
'I don't see how he can go if we don't let him. He doesn't head the expedition.'
'Oh, doesn't he? That's what I was about to tell you just before he came in. Ten ships of the fleet have landed on Dorlis since we arrived.'
'What!'
'Just that.'
'But what for?'
'That, my boy, is what I don't understand, either.'
'Mind if I drop in?' said Wynne Murry, pleasantly, and Theor Realo looked up in sudden anxiety from the papers that lay in hopeless disarray on the desk before him.
'Come in. I'll clear off a seat for you.' The albino hustled the mess off one of the two chairs in a state of twittering nerves.
Murry sat down and swung one long leg over the other. 'Are you assigned a job here, too?' He nodded at the desk.
Theor shook his head and smiled feebly. Almost automatically, he brushed the papers together in a heap and turned them face down.
In the months since he had returned to Dorlis with a hundred psychologists of various degrees of renown, he had felt himself pushed farther and farther from the center of things. There was room for him no longer. Except to answer questions on the actual state of things upon the robot world, which he alone had visited, he played no part. And even there he detected, or seemed to detect, anger that he should have gone, and not a competent scientist.
It was a thing to be resented. Yet, somehow, it had always been like that.
'Pardon me?' He had let Murry's next remark slip.
The secretary repeated, 'I say it's surprising you're not put to work, then. You made the original discovery, didn't you?'
'Yes,' the albino brightened. 'But it went out of my hands. It got beyond me.'
'You were on the robot world, though.'
That was a mistake, they tell me. I might have ruined everything.'
Murry grimaced. 'What really gets them, I guess, is that you've got a lot of first-hand dope that they didn't. Don't let their fancy titles fool you into thinking you're a nobody. A layman with common sense is better than a blind specialist. You and I - I'm a layman, too, you know - have to stand up for our rights. Here, have a cigarette.'
'I don't sm- I'll take one, thank you.' The albino felt himself warming to the long-bodied man opposite. He turned the papers face upward again, and lit up, bravely but uncertainly.
'Twenty-five years.' Theor spoke carefully, skirting around urgent coughs.
'Would you answer a few questions about the world?'
'I suppose so. That's all they ever ask me about. But hadn't you better ask them? They've probably got it all worked out now.' He blew the smoke as far from himself as possible.
Hurry said, 'Frankly, they haven't even begun, and I want the information without benefit of confusing psychological translation. First of all. what kind of people - or things - are these robots? You haven't a photocast of one of them, have you?'
'Well, no. I didn't like to take 'casts of them. But they're not things. They're people!'
'No? Do they look like - people?'
'Yes - mostly. Outside, anyway. I brought some microscopic studies of the cellular structure that I got hold of. The Board Master has them. They're different inside, you know, greatly simplified. But you'd never know that. They're interesting -and nice.'
'Are they simpler than the other life of the planet?'
'Oh, no. It's a very primitive planet. AndÖ and,' he was interrupted by a spasm of coughing and crushed the cigarette to death as unobtrusively as possible. 'They've got a protoplasmic base, you know. I don't think they have the slightest idea they're robots.'
'No. I don't suppose they would have. What about their science?'
'I don't know. I never got a chance to see. And everything was so different. I guess it would take an expert to understand.'
'Did they have machines?'
The albino looked surprised. 'Well, of course. A good many, of all sorts.'
'Large cities?'
'Yes!'
The secretary's eyes grew thoughtful. 'And you like them. Why?'
Theor Realo was brought up sharply. 'I don't know. They were just likable. We got along. They didn't bother me so. It's nothing I can put my finger on. Maybe it's because I have it so hard getting along back home, and they weren't as difficult as real people.'
'They were more friendly?'
'N-no. Can't say so. They never quite accepted me. I was a stranger, didn't know their language at first - all that. But' - he looked up with sudden brightness - 'I understood them better. I could tell what they were thinking better. I- But I don't know why.'
'Hm-m-m. Well - another cigarette? No? I've got to be walloping the pillow now. It's getting late. How about a twosome at golf tomorrow? I've worked up a little course. It'll do. Come on out. The exercise will put hair on your chest.'
He grinned and left.
He mumbled one sentence to himself: 'It looks like a death sentence' - and whistled thoughtfully as he passed along to his own quarters.
He repeated the phrase to himself when he faced the Board Master the next day, with the sash of office about his waist. He did not sit down.
'Again?' said the Board Master, wearily.
'Again!' assented the secretary. 'But real business this time. I may have to take over direction of your expedition.'
'What! Impossible, sir! I will listen to no such proposition.'
'I have my authority.' Wynne Murry presented the metalloid cylinder that snapped open at a flick of the thumb. 'I have full powers and full discretion as to their use. It is signed, as you will observe, by the chairman of the Congress of the Federation.'
'So- But why?' The Board Master, by an effort, breathed normally. 'Short of arbitrary tyranny, is there a reason?'
'A very good one, sir. All along, we have viewed this expedition from different angles. The Department of Science and Technology views the robot world not from the point of view of a scientific curiosity, but from the standpoint of its interference with the peace of the Federation. I don't think you've ever stopped to consider the danger inherent in this robot world.'
'None that I can see. It is thoroughly isolated and thoroughly harmless.'
'How can you know?'
'From the very nature of the experiment,' shouted the Board Master angrily. 'The original planners wanted as nearly a completely closed system as possible. Here they are, just as far off the trade routes as possible, in a thinly populated region of space. The whole idea was to have the robots develop free of interference.'
Murry smiled. 'I disagree with you there. Look, the whole trouble with you is that you're a theoretical man. You look at things the way they ought to be and I, a practical man, look at things as they are. No experiment can be set up and allowed to run indefinitely under its own power. It is taken for granted that somewhere there is at least an observer who watches and modifies as circumstances warrant.'
'Well?' said the Board Master stolidly.
'Well, the observers in this experiment, the original psychologists of Dorlis, passed away with the First Confederation, and for fifteen thousand years the experiment has proceeded by itself. Little errors have added up and become big ones and introduced alien factors which induced still other errors. It's a geometric progression. And there's been no one to halt it.'
'Pure hypothesis.'
'Maybe. But you're interested only in the robot world, and I've got to think of the entire Federation.'
'And just what possible danger can the robot world be to the Federation? I don't know what in Arcturus you're driving at, man.'
Murry sighed. 'I'll be simple, but don't blame me if I sound melodramatic. The Federation hasn't had any internal warfare for centuries. What will happen if we come into contact with these robots?'
'Are you afraid of one world?'
'Could be. What about their science? Robots can do funny things sometimes.'
'What science can they have? They're not metal-electricity supermen. They're weak protoplasmic creatures, a poor imitation of actual humanity, built around a positronic brain adjusted to a set of simplified human psychological laws. If the word "robot" is scaring you -'
'No, it isn't, but I've talked to Theor Realo. He's the only one who's seen them, you know.'
The Board Master cursed silently and fluently. It came of letting a weak-minded freak of a layman get underfoot where he could babble and do harm.
He said, 'We've got Realo's full story, and we've evaluated it fully and capably. I assure you, no harm exists in them. The experiment is so thoroughly academic, I wouldn't spend two days on it if it weren't for the broad scope of the thing. From what we see, the whole idea was to build up a positronic brain containing modifications of one or two of the fundamental axioms. We haven't worked out the details, but they must be minor, as it was the first experiment of this nature ever tried, and even the great mythical psychologists of that day had to progress stepwise. Those robots, I tell you, are neither supermen nor beasts. I assure you - as a psychologist.'
'Sorry! I'm a psychologist, too. A little more rule-of-thumb, I'm afraid. That's all. But even little modifications! Take the general spirit of combativeness. That isn't the scientific term, but I've no patience for that. You know what I mean. We humans used to be combative. But it's being bred out of us. A stable political and economic system doesn't encourage the waste energy of combat. It's not a survival factor. But suppose the robots are combative. Suppose as the result of a wrong turn during the millennia they've been unwatched, they've become far more combative than ever their first makers intended. They'd be uncomfortable things to be with.'
'And suppose all the stars in the Galaxy became novae at the same time. Let's really start worry ing.'
'And there's another point.' Murry ignored the other's heavy sarcasm. 'Theor Realo liked those robots. He liked robots better than he likes real people. He felt that he fitted there, and we all know he's been a bad misfit in his own world.'
'And what,' asked the Board Master, 'is the significance of that?'
'You don't see it?' Wynne Murry lifted his eyebrows. 'Theor Realo likes those robots because he is like them, obviously. I'll guarantee right now that a complete psychic analysis of Theor Realo will show a modification of several fundamental axioms, and the same ones as in the robots.
'And,' the secretary drove on without a pause, 'Theor Realo worked for a quarter of a century to prove a point, when all science would have laughed him to death if they had known about it. There's fanaticism there; good, honest, inhuman perseverance. Those robots are probably like that!'
'You're advancing no logic. You're arguing like a maniac, like a moon-struck idiot.'
'I don't need strict mathematical proof. Reasonable doubt is sufficient. I've got to protect the Federation. Look, it is reasonable, you know. The psychologists of Dorlis weren't as super as all that. They had to advance stepwise, as you yourself pointed out. Their humanoids - let's not call them robots -were only imitations of human beings and they could be good ones. Humans possess certain very, very complicated reaction systems - things like social consciousness, and a tendency toward the establishment of ethical systems; and more ordinary things like chivalry, generosity, fair play and so on, that simply can't possibly be duplicated. I don't think those humanoids can have them. But they must have perseverance, which practically implies stubbornness and combativeness, if my notion on Theor Realo holds good. Well, if their science is anywhere at all, then I don't want to have them running loose in the Galaxy, if our numbers are a thousand or million times theirs. And I don't intend to permit them to do so!'
The Board Master's face was rigid. 'What are your immediate intentions?'
'As yet undecided. But I think I am going to organize a small-scale landing on the planet.'
'Now, wait.' The old psychologist was up and around the desk. He seized the secretary's elbow. 'Are you quite certain you know what you're doing? The potentialities in this massive experiment are beyond any possible precalculation by you or me. You can't know what you're destroying.'
'I know. Do you think I enjoy what I'm doing? This isn't a hero's job. I'm enough of a psychologist to want to know what's going on, but I've been sent here to protect the Federation, and to the best of my ability I intend doing it - and a dirty job it is. But I can't help it.'
'You can't have thought it out. What can you know of the insight it will give us into the basic ideas of psychology? This will amount to a fusion of two Galactic systems, that will send us to heights that will make up in knowledge and power a million times the amount of harm the robots could ever do, if they were metal-electricity supermen.'
The secretary shrugged. 'Now you're the one that is playing with faint possibilities.'
'Listen, I'll make a deal. Blockade them. Isolate them with your ships. Mount guards. But don't touch them. Give us more time. Give us a chance. You must!'
'I've thought of that. But I would have to get Congress to agree to that. It would be expensive, you know.'
The Board Master flung himself into his chair in wild impatience. 'What kind of expense are you talking about? Do you realize the nature of the repayment if we succeed?'
Murry considered; then, with a half smile, 'What if they develop interstellar travel?'
The Board Master said quickly, 'Then I'll withdraw my objections.' The secretary rose, 'I'll have it out with Congress.'
Brand Gorla's face was carefully emotionless as he watched the Board Master's stooped back. The cheerful pep talks to the available members of the expedition lacked meat, and he listened to them impatiently.
He said, 'What are we going to do now?'
The Board Master's shoulders twitched and he didn't turn. 'I've sent for Theor Realo. That little fool left for the Eastern Continent last week -'
'Why?'
The older man blazed at the interruption. 'How can I understand anything that freak does! Don't you see that Murry's right? He's a psychic abnormality. We had no business leaving him unwatched. If I had ever thought of looking at him twice, I wouldn't have. He's coming back now, though, and he's going to stay back.' His voice fell to a mumble. 'Should have been back two hours ago.'
'It's an impossible position, sir,' said Brand, flatly.
'Think so?'
'Well- Do you think Congress will stand for an indefinite patrol off the robot world? It runs into money, and average Galactic citizens aren't going to see it as worth the taxes. The psychological equations degenerate into the axioms of common sense. In fact, I don't see why Murry agreed to consult Congress.'
'Don't you?' The Board Master finally faced his junior. 'Well, the fool considers himself a psychologist, Galaxy help us, and that's his weak point. He flatters himself that he doesn't want to destroy the robot world in his heart, but that it's the good of the Federation that requires it. And he'll jump at any reasonable compromise. Congress won't agree to it indefinitely, you don't have to point that out to me.' He was talking quietly, patiently. 'But I will ask for ten years, two years, six months -as much as I can get. I'll get something. In that time, we'll learn new facts about the world. Somehow we'll strengthen our case and renew the agreement when it expires. We'll save the project yet.'
There was a short silence and the Board Master added slowly and bitterly, 'And that's where Theor Realo plays a vital part.'
Brand Gorla watched silently, and waited. The Board Master said, 'On that one point, Murry saw what we didn't. Realo is a psychological cripple, and is our real clue to the whole affair. If we study him, we'll have a rough picture of what the robot is like, distorted of course, since his environment has been a hostile, unfriendly one. But we ca0 make allowance for that, estimate his nature in a- Ahh, I'm tired of the whole subject.'
The signal box flashed, and the Board Master sighed. 'Well, he's here. All right, Gorla, sit down, you make me nervous. Let's take a look at him.'
Theor Realo came through the door like a comet and brought himself to a panting halt in the middle of the floor. He looked from one to the other with weak, peering eyes.
'How did all this happen?'
'All what?' said the Board Master coldly. 'Sit down. I want to ask you some questions.'
'No. You first answer me,'
'Sit down!'
Realo sat. His eyes were brimming. 'They're going to destroy the robot world.'
'Don't worry about that.'
'But you said they could if the robots discovered interstellar travel. You said so. You fool. Don't you see -' He was choking.
The Board Master frowned uneasily. 'Will you calm down and talk sense?'
The albino gritted his teeth and forced the words out. 'But they'll have interstellar travel before long.'
And the two psychologists shot toward the little man.
'What!!'
'WellÖ well, what do you think?' Realo sprang upward with all the fury of desperation. 'Did you think I landed in a desert or in the middle of an ocean and explored a world all by myself? Do you think life is a storybook? I was captured as soon as I landed and taken to the big city. At least, I think it was a big city. It was different from our kind. It had - But I won't tell you.'
'Never mind the city,' shrieked the Board Master. 'You were captured. Go ahead.'
'They studied me. They studied my machine. And then, one night, I left, to tell the Federation. They didn't know I left. They didn't want me to leave.' His voice broke. 'And I would have stayed as soon as not, but the Federation had to know.'
'Did you tell them anything about your ship?'
'How could I? I'm no mechanic. I don't know the theory or construction. But I showed them how to work the controls and let them look at the motors. That's all.'
Brand Gorla said, to himself mostly, 'Then they'll never get it. That isn't enough.'
The albino's voice raised itself in sudden shrieking triumph. 'Oh, yes, they will. I know them. They're machines, you know. They'll work on that problem. And they'll work. And they'll work. And they'll never quit. And they'll get it. They got enough out of me. I'll bet they got enough.'
The Board Master looked long, and turned away - wearily. 'Why didn't you tell us?'
'Because you took my world away from me. I discovered it -by myself - all by myself. And after I had done all the real work, and invited you in, you threw me out. All you had for me was complaints that I had landed on the world and might have ruined everything by interference. Why should I tell you? Find out for yourselves if you're so wise, that you could afford to kick me around.'
The Board Master thought bitterly, 'Misfit! Inferiority complex! Persecution mania! Nice! It all fits in, now that we've bothered to take our eyes off the horizon and see what was under our nose. And now it's all ruined.'
He said, 'All right, Realo, we all lose. Go away.'
Brand Gorla said tightly, 'All over? Really all over?'
The Board Master answered, 'Really all over. The original experiment, as such, is over. The distortions created by Realo's visit will easily be large enough to make the plans we are studying here a dead language. And besides - Murry is right. If they have interstellar travel, they're dangerous.'
Realo was shouting, 'But you're not going to destroy them. You can't destroy them. They haven't hurt anyone.'
There was no answer, and he raved on, 'I'm going back. I'll warn them. They'll be prepared. I'll warn them.'
He was backing toward the door, his thin, white hair bristling, his red-rimmed eyes bulging.
The Board Master did not move to stop him when he dashed out.
'Let him go. It was his lifetime. I don't care any more.'
Theor Realo smashed toward the robot world at an acceleration that was half choking him.
Somewhere ahead was the dustspeck of an isolated world with artificial imitations of humanity struggling along in an experiment that had died. Struggling blindly toward a new goal of interstellar travel that was to be their death sentence.
He was heading toward that world, toward the same city in which he had been 'studied' the first time. He remembered it well. Its name was the first words of their language he had learned.
New York!



***



On July 26, 1943, which was a Monday, I had one of the rare days off I could take during wartime. (It was, after all, my first wedding anniversary.) I was in New York that day, and I visited Campbell just as in the good old days. I discussed with him another story in the 'Foundation' series, as well as another in the 'positronic robot' series. From then on, I always saw Campbell on the rare days when I was in New York on a weekday, and of course we corresponded regularly.
I was definitely back at writing. Output was low, but during the remaining war years I wrote two positronic robot stories, 'Catch That Rabbit' and 'Paradoxical Escape,' which appeared in the February 1944 and August 1945 issues of Astounding, respectively. Both were eventually included in I, Robot. (The latter story appears in /, Robot under the title of 'Escape.' The word 'Paradoxical' had been added by Campbell in one of his few title changes, and I didn't like it.)
I also wrote no less than four stories of the 'Foundation' series during those same years. These were 'The Big and the Little,' 'The Wedge,' 'Dead Hand' and 'The Mule.' All appeared in Astounding, of course, the first three in the August 1944, October 1944, and April 1945 issues, respectively.
'The Mule' set several records for me. It was the longest story I had ever written up to that time - fifty thousand words long. Yet even so, and despite the fact that I had to work on it in small scraps of time left over from job and marriage, I managed to complete it in three and a half months. It was submitted on May 21, 1945, and was accepted on the twenty-ninth. (Indeed, throughout the war I never got a single rejection, or even a delayed acceptance. Nor did I submit to anyone but Campbell.)
What's more, at the beginning of 1944 Campbell raised his basic rate to one and a half cents a word and some months later to a cent and three quarters. For 'The Mule' I received a check at the higher rate, for $875. It was by far the largest check I ever received for a single story. By the end of the war, in fact, I was making half as much money writing in my spare time as I was making at my N.A.E.S. job, even though I had been promoted and was receiving sixty dollars a week by the end of the war.
Then, too, 'The Mule' was the first story I ever had published as a serial. It appeared in two parts in the November and December 1945 issues of Astounding.
Of the wartime 'Foundation' stories, 'The Big and the Little' and 'The Wedge' are included in Foundation, while 'Dead Hand' and 'The Mule,' together, make up all of Foundation and Empire.
During the two years between mid-1943 and mid-1945, I wrote only one story that was neither one of the 'Foundation' series nor one of the 'Positronic robot' series, and that one was inspired directly by the N.A.E.S. This story was 'Blind Alley,' which was written during September and early October of 1944. It was submitted to Campbell on October 10, and accepted on the twentieth.






Blind Alley [4]



Only once in Galactic History was an intelligent race of non-Humans discovered-
"Essays on History.' by Ligurn Vier











I



From: Bureau for the Outer Provinces

To: Loodun Antyok, Chief Public Administrator, A-8

Subject: Civilian Supervisor of Cepheus 18, Administrative Position as, References:


(a) Act of Council 2515, of the year 971 of the Galactic Empire, entitled, 'Appointment of Officials of the Administra tive Service, Methods for, Revision of.'
(b) Imperial Directive, Ja 2374, dated 243/975 G.E.
1. By authorization of reference (a), you are hereby ap pointed to the subject position. The authority of said position as Civilian Supervisor of Cepheus 18 will extend over non- Human subjects of the Emperor living upon the planet under the terms of autonomy set forth in reference (b).
2. The duties of the subject position shall comprise the gen eral supervision of all non-Human internal affairs, co-ordina tion of authorized government investigating and reporting committees, and the preparation of semiannual reports on all phases of non-Human affairs.



C. Morily, Chief,

BuOuProv, 12/977 G.E.


Loodun Antyok had listened carefully, and now he shook his round head mildly, 'Friend, I'd like to help you, but you've grabbed the wrong dog by the ears. You'd better take this up with the Bureau.'
Tomor Zammo flung himself back into his chair, rubbed his beak of a nose fiercely, thought better of whatever he was going to say, and answered quietly, 'Logical, but not practical. I can't make a trip to Trantor now. You're the Bureau's representative on Cepheus 18. Are you entirely helpless?'
'Well, even as Civilian Supervisor, I've got to work within the limits of Bureau policy.'
'Good,' Zammo cried, 'then, tell me what Bureau policy is. I head a scientific investigating committee, under direct Imperial authorization with, supposedly, the widest powers; yet at every angle in the road I am pulled up short by the civilian authorities with only the parrot shriek of "Bureau policy" to justify themselves. What is Bureau policy? I haven't received a decent definition yet.'
Antyok's gaze was level and unruffled. He said, "As I see it -and this is not official, so you can't hold me to it - Bureau policy consists in treating the non-Humans as decently as possible.'
'Then, what authority have they -'
'Ssh! No use raising your voice. As a matter of fact, His Imperial Majesty is a humanitarian and a disciple of the philosophy of Aurelion. I can tell you quietly that it is pretty well-known that it is the Emperor himself who first suggested that this world be established. You can bet that Bureau policy will stick pretty close to Imperial notions. And you can bet that I can't paddle my way against that sort of current.'
'Well, m'boy,' the physiologist's fleshy eyelids quivered, 'if you take that sort of attitude, you're going to lose your job. No, I won't have you kicked out. That's not what I mean at all. Your job will just fade out from under you, because nothing is going to be accomplished here!'
'Really? Why?' Antyok was short, pink, and pudgy, and his plump-cheeked face usually found it difficult to put on display any expression other than one of bland and cheerful politeness - but it looked grave now.
'You haven't been here long. I have.' Zammo scowled. 'Mind if I smoke?' The cigar in his hand was gnarled and strong and was puffed to life carelessly.
He continued roughly, 'There's no place here for humani-tarianism, administrator. You're treating non-Humans as if they were Humans, and it won't work. In fact, I don't like the word "non-Human." They're animals.'
'They're intelligent,' interjected Antyok, softly.
'Well, intelligent animals, then. I presume the two terms are not mutually exclusive. Alien intelligences mingling in the same space won't work, anyway.'
'Do you propose killing them off?'
'Galaxy, no!' He gestured with his cigar. 'I propose we look upon them as objects for study, and only that. We could learn a good deal from these animals if we were allowed to. Knowledge, I might point out, that would be used for the immediate benefit of the human race. There's humanity for you. There's the good of the masses, if it's this spineless cult of Aurelion that interests you.'
'What, for instance, do you refer to?'
'To take the most obvious - You have heard of their chemistry, I take it?'
'Yes,' Antyok admitted. 'I have leafed through most of the reports on the non-Humans published in the last ten years. I expect to go through more.'
'Hmp. Well- Then, all I need say is that their chemical therapy is extremely thorough. For instance, I have witnessed personally the healing of a broken bone - what passes for a broken bone with them, I mean - by the use of a pill. The bone was whole in fifteen minutes. Naturally, none of their drugs are any earthly use on Humans. Most would kill quickly. But if we found out how they worked on the non-Humans - on the animals-'
'Yes, yes. I see the significance.'
'Oh, you do. Come, that's gratifying. A second point is that these animals communicate hi an unknown manner.'
Telepathy!'
The scientist's mouth twisted, as he ground out, 'Telepathy! Telepathy! Telepathy! Might as well say by witch brew. Nobody knows anything about telepathy except its name. What is the mechanism of telepathy? What is the physiology and the physics of it? I would like to find out, but I can't. Bureau policy, if I listen to you, forbids.'
Antyok's little mouth pursed itself. 'But - Pardon me, doctor, but I don't follow you. How are you prevented? Surely the Civil Administration has made no attempt to hamper scientific investigation of these non-Humans. I cannot speak for my predecessor entirely, of course, but I myself -'
'No direct interference has occurred. I don't speak of that. But by the Galaxy, administrator, we're hampered by the spirit of the entire set-up. You're making us deal with humans. You allow them their own leader and internal autonomy. You pamper them and give them what Aurelion's philosophy would call "rights." I can't deal with their leader.'
'Why not?'
'Because he refuses to allow me a free hand. He refuses to allow experiments on any subject without the subject's own consent. The two or three volunteers we get are not too bright. It's an impossible arrangement.'
Antyok shrugged helplessly.
Zammo continued, 'In addition, it is obviously impossible to learn anything of value concerning the brains, physiology and chemistry of these animals without dissection, dietary experiments and drugs. You know, administrator, scientific investigation is a hard game. Humanity hasn't much place in it.'
Loodun Antyok tapped his chin with a doubtful finger, 'Must it be quite so-hard? These are harmless creatures, these non-Humans. Surely, dissection - Perhaps, if you were to approach them a bit differently - I have the idea that you antagonize them. Your attitude might be somewhat overbearing.'
'Overbearing! I am not one of these whining social psychologists who are all the fad these days. I don't believe you can solve a problem that requires dissection by approaching it with what is called the "correct personal attitude" in the cant of the times.'
'I'm sorry you think so. Sociopsychological training is required of all administrators above the grade of A-4.'
Zammo withdrew his cud of a cigar from his mouth and replaced it after a suitably contemptuous interval. 'Then you'd better use a bit of your technique on the Bureau. You know, I do have friends at the Imperial Court.'
'Well, now, I can't take the matter up with them, not baldly. Basic policy does not fall within my cognizance, and such things can only be initiated by the Bureau. But, you know, we might try an indirect approach on this.' He smiled faintly, 'Strategy.'
'What sort?'
Antyok pointed a sudden finger, while his other hand fell lightly on the rows of gray-bound reports upon the floor just next his chair, 'Now, look, I've gone through most of these. They're dull, but contain some facts. For instance, when was the last non-Human infant born on Cepheus 18?'
Zammo spent little time in consideration. 'Don't know. Don't care either.'
'But the Bureau would. There's never been a non-Human infant born on Cepheus 18 - not in the two years the world has been established. Do you know the reason?'
The physiologist shrugged, 'Too many possible factors. It would take study.'
'All right, then. Suppose you write a report -'
'Reports! I've written twenty.'
'Write another. Stress the unsolved problems. Tell them you must change your methods. Harp on the birth-rate problem. The Bureau doesn't dare ignore that. If the non-Humans die out, someone will have to answer to the Emperor. You see -'
Zammo stared, his eyes dark, 'That will swing it?'
'I've been working for the Bureau for twenty-seven years. I know its ways.'
'I'll think about it.' Zammo rose and stalked out of the office. The door slammed behind him.
It was later that Zammo said to a co-worker, 'He's a bureaucrat, in the first place. He won't abandon the orthodoxies of paper work and he won't risk sticking his neck out. He'll accomplish little by himself, yet maybe more than a little if we work through him.'



From: Administrative Headquarters, Cepheus 18

To: BuOuProv

Subject: Outer Province Project 2563, Part TT - Scientific Investigations of non-Humans of Cepheus 18, Co-ordination of,


References:
(a)ÖBuOuProv letr. Cep-N-CM/jg, 100132, dated 302/975 G.E.
(b)ÖAdHQ-Cephl8 letr. AA-LA/mn, dated 140/977 G.E. Enclosure:
1. SciGroup 10, Physical amp; Biochemical Division, Report, entitled, 'Physiologic Characteristics of non-Humans of Cepheus 18, Part XI,' dated 172/977 G.E.
1. Enclosure 1, included herewith, is forwarded for the in formation of the BuOuProv. It is to be noted that Section XII, paragraphs 1-16 of Encl. 1, concern possible changes in pre sent BuOuProv policy with regard to non-Humans with a view to facilitating physical and chemical investigations at present proceeding under authorization of reference (a)
It is brought to the attention of the BuOuProv that refer ence (b) has already discussed possible changes in investigating methods and that it remains the opinion of AdHQ-Cephl8 that such changes are as yet premature. It is nevertheless suggested that the question of non-Human birth rate be made the subject of a BuOuProv project assigned to AdHQ-Cephl8 in view of the importance attached by SciGroup 10 to the problem, as evidenced in Section V of Enclosure 1.



L. Antyok, Superv.

AdHQ-CephlS, 174/977



From: BuOuProv 

To: AdHQ-CephlS

Subject: Outer Province Project 2563 - Scientific Investigations of non-Humans of Cepheus 18, Co-ordination of, Reference: (a) AdHQ-CephlS letr. AA-LA/mn, dated 174/977 G.E.


1. In response to the suggestion contained in paragraph 2 of reference (a), it is considered that the question of the non- Human birth rate does not fall within the cognizance of AdHQ- Ceph 18. In view of the fact that SciGroup 10 has reported said sterility to be probably due to a chemical deficiency in the food supply, all investigations in the field are relegated to Sci Group 10 as the proper authority.
2. Investigating procedures by the various SciGroups shall continue according to current directives on the subject. No changes in policy are envisaged.



C. Morily, Chief,

BuOuProv, 186/977 G.E.






II


There was a loose-jointed gauntness about the news reporter which made him appear somberly tall. He was Gustiv Ban-nerd, with whose reputation was combined ability - two things which do not invariably go together despite the maxims of elementary morality.
Loodum Antyok took his measure doubtfully and said, 'There's no use denying that you're right. But the Sci-Group report was confidential. I don't understand how -' 'It leaked,' said Bannerd, callously. 'Everything leaks.' Antyok was obviously baffled, and his pink face furrowed slightly, Then I'll just have to plug the leak here. I can't pass your story. All references to SciGroup complaints have to come out. You see that, don't you?'
'No.' Bannerd was calm enough. 'It's important; and I have my rights under the Imperial directive. I think the Empire should know what's going on.'
'But it isn't going on,' said Antyok, despairingly. 'Your claims are all wrong. The bureau isn't going to change its policy. I showed you the letters.'
'You think you can stand up against Zammo when he puts the pressure on?' the newsman asked derisively.
'I will - if I think he's wrong.'
'If!' stated Bannerd flatly. Then, in a sudden fervor, 'Antyok, the Empire has something great here; something greater by a good deal than the government apparently realizes. They're destroying it. They're treating these creatures like animals.'
'Really-' began Antyok, weakly.
'Don't talk about Cepheus 18. It's a zoo. It's a high-class zoo, with your petrified scientists teasing those poor creatures with their sticks poking through the bars. You throw them chunks of meat, but you cage them up. I know! I've been writing about them for two years now. I've almost been living with them.'
'Zammo says -'
'Zammo!' This with hard contempt.
'Zammo says,' insisted Antyok with worried firmness, 'that we treat them too like humans as it is.'
The newsman's straight, long cheeks were rigid, 'Zammo is rather animallike in his own right. He is a science-worshiper. We can do with less of them. Have you read Aureh'on's works?' The last was suddenly posed.
'Umm. Yes. I understand the Emperor -'
'The Emperor tends towards us. That is good - better than the hounding of the last reign.'
'I don't see where you're heading?'
These aliens have much to teach us. You understand? It is nothing that Zammo and his Sci-Group can use; no chemistry, no telepathy. It's a way of life; a way of thinking. The aliens have no crime, no misfits. What effort is being made to study their philosophy? Or to set them up as a problem in social engineering?'
Antyok grew thoughtful, and his plump face smoothed out, 'It is an interesting consideration. It would be a matter for psychologists -'
'No good. Most of them are quacks. Psychologists point out problems, but their solutions are fallacious. We need men of Aurelion. Men of the Philosophy -'
'But look here, we can't turn Cepheus 18 intoÖ into a metaphysical study.'
'Why not? It can be done easily.'
'How?'
'Forget your puny test-tube peerings. Allow the aliens to set up a society free of Humans. Give them an untrammeled independence and allow an intermingling of philosophies -'
Antyok's nervous response came,'That can't be done in a day.'
'We can start in a day.'
The administrator said slowly, 'Well, I can't prevent you from trying to start.' He grew confidential, his mild eyes thoughtful, 'You'll ruin your own game, though, if you publish SciGroup 10's report and denounce it on humanitarian grounds. The Scientists are powerful.'
'And we of The Philosophy as well.'
'Yes, but there's an easy way. You needn't rave. Simply point out that the SciGroup is not solving its problems. Do so unemotionally and let the readers think out your point of view for -themselves. Take the birth-rate problem, for instance. There's something for you. In a generation, the non-Humans might die out, for all science can do. Point out that a more philosophical approach is required. Or pick some other obvious point. Use your judgment, eh?'
Antyok smiled ingratiatingly as he arose, 'But, for the Galaxy's sake, don't stir up a bad smell.'
Bannerd was stiff and unresponsive, 'You may be right.'
It was later that Bannerd wrote in a capsule message to a friend, 'He is not clever, by any means. He is confused and has no guiding-line through life. Certainly utterly incompetent in his job. But he's a cutter and a trimmer, compromises his way around difficulties, and will yield concessions rather than risk a hard stand. He may prove valuable in that. Yours in Aurelion.'



From: AdHQ-Cephl8 

To: BuOuProv

Subject: Birth rate of non-Humans on Cepheus 18, News Report on. References:


(a) AdHQ-Cephl8 letr. AA-LA/mn, dated 174/977 G.E.
(b) Imperial Directive, Ja2374, dated 243/975 G.E. Enclosures:
1-G. Bannerd news report, date-lined Cepheus 18, 201/977 G.E.
2-G. Bannerd news report, date-lined Cepheus 18, 203/977 G.E.
1. The sterility of non-Humans on Cepheus 18, reported to the BuOuProv in reference (a), has become the subject of news reports to the galactic press. The news reports in question are submitted herewith for the information of the BuOuProv as Enclosures 1 and 2. Although said reports are based on mat erial considered confidential and closed to the public, the news reporter in question maintained his rights to free expression under the terms of reference (b).
2. In view of the unavoidable publicity and misunderstand ing on the part of the general public now inevitable, it is re quested that the BuOuProv direct future policy on the prob lem of non-Human sterility.



L. Antyok, Superv.

AdHQ-Cephl8, 209/977 G.E.



From: BuOuProv 

To: AdHQ-Cephl8

Subject: Birth rate of non-Humans on Cepheus 18, Investigation of. References:


(a) AdHQ-Cephl8 letr. AA-LA/mn, dated 209/977 G.E.
(b) AdHQ-Cephl8 letr. AA-LA/mn, dated 174/977 G.E.
1. It is proposed to investigate the causes and the means of precluding the unfavorable birth-rate phenomena mentioned in references (a) and (b). A project is therefore set up, entitled, 'Birth rate of non-Humans on Cepheus 18, Investigation of* to which, in view of the crucial importance of the subject, a priority of AA is given.
2. The number assigned to the subject project is 2910, and all expenses incidental to it shall be assigned to Appropriation number 18/78.



C, Morily, Chief,

BuOuProY, 223/977 G.E.






III


If Tomor Zammo's ill-humor lessened within the grounds of SciGroup 10 Experimental Station, his friendliness had not thereby increased. Antyok found himself standing alone at the viewing window into the main field laboratory.
The main field laboratory was a broad court set at the environmental conditions of Cepheus 18 itself for the discomfort of the experimenters and the convenience of the experimem-tees. Through the burning sand, and the dry, oxygen-rich air, there sparkled the hard brilliance of hot, white sunlight. And under the blaze, the brick-red non-Humans, wrinkled of skin and wiry of build, huddled in their squatting positions of ease, by ones and twos.
Zammo emerged from the laboratory. He paused to drink water thirstily. He looked up, moisture gleaming on his upper lip, 'Like to step in there?'
Antyok shook his head definitely, 'No, thank you. What's the temperature right now?'
'A hundred twenty, if there were shade. And they complain of the cold. It's drinking time now. Want to watch them drink?'
A spray of water shot upward from the fountain in the center of the court, and the little alien figures swayed to their feet and hopped eagerly forward in a queer, springy half-run. They milled about the water, jostling one another. The centers of their faces were suddenly disfigured by the projection of a long and flexible fleshy tube, which thrust forward into the spray and was withdrawn dripping.
It continued for long minutes. The bodies swelled and the wrinkles disappeared. They retreated slowly, backing away, with the drinking tube flicking in and out, before receding finally into a pink, wrinkled mass above a wide, lipless mouth. They went to sleep in groups in the shaded angles, plump and sated.
'Animals!' said Zammo, with contempt.
'How often do they drink?' asked Antyok.
'As often as they want. They can go a week if they have to. We water them every day. They store it under their skin. They eat in the evenings. Vegetarians, you know.'
Antyok smiled chubbily, 'It's nice to get a bit of firsthand information occasionally. Can't read reports all the time.'
'Yes?' - noncommittally. Then, 'What's new? What about the lacy-pants boys on Trantor?'
Antyok shrugged dubiously, "You can't get the Bureau to commit itself, unfortunately. With the Emperor sympathetic to the Aurelionists, humanitarianism is the order of the day. You know that.'
There was a pause in which the administrator chewed his lip uncertainly. 'But there's this birth-rate problem now. It's finally been assigned to AdHQ, you know - and double A priority, too.'
Zammo muttered wordlessly.
Antyok said, 'You may not realize it, but that project will now take precedence over all other work proceeding on Ceph-eus 18. It's important.'
He turned back to the viewing window and said thoughtfully with a bald lack of preamble. 'Do you think those creatures might be unhappy?'
'Unhappy!' The word was an explosion.
'Well, then,' Antyok corrected hastily, 'maladjusted. You understand? It's difficult to adjust an environment to a race we know so little of.'
'Say - did you ever see the world we took them from?'
'I've read the reports-'
'Reports!' - infinite contempt. 'I've seen it. This may look like desert out there to you, but it's a watery paradise to those devils. They have all the food and water they can get. They have a world to themselves with vegetation and natural water flow, instead of a lump of silica and granite where fungi were force-grown in caves and water had to be steamed out of gypsum rock. In ten years, they would have been dead to the last beast, and we saved them. Unhappy? Ga-a-ah, if they are, they haven't the decency of most animals.'
'Well, perhaps. Yet I have a notion.'
'A notion? What is your notion?' Zammo reached for one of his cigars.
'It's something that might help you. Why not study the creatures in a more integrated fashion? Let them use their initiative. After all, they did have a highly-developed science. Your reports speak of it continually. Give them problems to solve.' 'Such as?'
'OhÖ oh,' Antyok waved his hands helplessly. 'Whatever you think might help most. For instance, spaceships. Get them into the control room and study their reactions.' 'Why?' asked Zammo with dry bluntness. 'Because the reaction of their minds to tools and controls adjusted to the human temperament can teach you a lot. In addition, it will make a more effective bribe, it seems to me, than anything you've yet tried. You'll get more volunteers if they think they'll be doing something interesting.' 'That's your psychology coming out. Hm-m-m. Sounds better than it probably is. I'll sleep on it. And where would I get permission, in any case, to let them handle spaceships? I've none at my disposal, and it would take a good deal longer than it was worth to follow down the line of red tape to get one assigned to us.'
Antyok pondered, and his forehead creased lightly, 'It doesn't have to be spaceships. But even so - If you would write up another report and make the suggestion yourself - strongly, you understand - I might figure out some way of tying it up with my birth-rate project. A double-A priority can get practically anything, you know, without questions.'
Zammo's interest lacked a bit even of mildness, 'Well, maybe. Meanwhile, I've some basal metabolism tests in progress, and it's getting late. I'll think about it. It's got its points.'



From: AdHQ-Cephl8

To: BuOuProv

Subject: Outer Province Project 2910, Part I - Birth rate of non-Humans on Cepheus 18, Investigation of,


Reference:
(a) BuOuProv letr. Ceph-N-CM/car, 115097, 233/977 G.E.
Enclosure:
1. SciGroup 10, Physical amp; Biochemical Division report, Part XV, dated 220/977 G.E.
1. Enclosure 1 is forwarded herewith for the information of the BuOuProv.
2. Special attention is directed to Section V, Paragraph 3 of Enclosure 1 in which it is requested that a spaceship be as signed SciGroup 10 for use in expediting investigations author ized by the BuOuProv. It is considered by AdHQ-Ceph18 that such investigations may be of material use in aiding work now in progress on the subject project, authorized by reference (a). It is suggested, in view of the high priority placed by the BuOu Prov upon the subject project, that immediate consideration be given the SciGroup's request.



L. Antyok, Superv.

AdHQ-CephlS, 240/977 G.E.



From: BuOuProv 

To: AdHQ-CephlS

Subject: Outer Province Project 2910 - Birth rate of non-Humans on Cepheus 18, Investigation of. Reference: (a) AdHQ-CephlS letr. AA-LA/mn, dated 240/977 G.E.


1. Training Ship AN-R-2055 is being placed at the disposal of AdHQ-Ceph18 for use in investigation of non-Humans on Cepheus 18 with respect to the subject project and other authorized OuProv projects, as requested in Enclosure 1 to reference (a).
2. It is urgently requested that work on the subject project be expedited by all available means.



C. Morily, Head,

BuOuProv, 251/977G.E.






IV


The little, bricky creature must have been more uncomfortable than his bearing would admit to. He was carefully wrapped in a temperature already adjusted to the point where his human companions steamed in their open shirts.
His speech was high-pitched and careful, 'I find it damp, but not unbearably so at this low temperature.'
Antyok smiled, 'It was nice of you to come. I had planned to visit you. but a trial run in yoUr atmosphere out there-' The smile had become rueful.
'It doesn't matter. You other worldlings have done more for us than ever we were able to do for ourselves. It is an obligation that is but imperfectly returned by the endurance on my part of a trifling discomfort.' His speech seemed always indirect, as if he approached his thoughts sidelong, or as if it were against all etiquette to be blunt.
Gustiv Bannerd, seated in an angle of the room, with one long leg crossing the other, scrawled nimbly and said, 'You don't mind if I record all this?'
The Cepheid non-Human glanced briefly at the journalist, 'I have no objection.'
Antyok's apologetics persisted. This is not a purely social affair, sir. I would not have forced discomfort on you for that. There are important questions to be considered, and you are the leader of your people.'
The Cepheid nodded, 'I am satisfied your purposes are kindly. Please proceed.'
The administrator almost wriggled in his difficulty in putting thoughts into words. 'It is a subject,' he said, 'of delicacy, and one I wou'd never bring up if it weren't for the overwhelming importance of theÖ uhÖ question. I am only the spokesman of my government-'
'My people consider the otherworld government a kindly one.'
'Well, yes, they are kindly. For that reason, they are disturbed over the fact that your people no longer breed.'
Antyok paused, and waited with worry for a reaction that did not come. The Cepheid's face was motionless except for the soft, trembling motion of the wrinkled area that was Ms deflated drinking tube.
Antyok continued, 'It is a question we have hesitated to bring up because of its extremely personal angles. Noninterference is my government's prime aim, and we have done our best to investigate the problem quietly and without disturbing your people. But, frankly, we -'
'Have failed?' finished the Cepheid, at the other's pause.
'Yes. Or at least, we have not discovered a concrete failure to reproduce the exact environment of your original world; with, of course, the necessary modification to make it more livable. Naturally, it is thought there is some chemical shortcoming. And so I ask your voluntary help in the matter. Your people are advanced in the study of your own biochemistry. If you do not choose, or would rather not -'
'No, no, I can help.' The Cepheid seemed cheerful about it. The smooth flat planes of his loose-skinned, hairless skull wrinkled in an alien response to an uncertain emotion. 'It is not a matter that any of us would have thought would have disturbed you other-worldlings. That it does is but another indication of your well-meaning kindness. This wor'd we find congenial, a paradise in comparison to our o!d. It lacks in nothing. Conditions such as now prevail belong in our legends of the Golden Age.'
'Well-'
'But there is a something; a something you may not understand. We cannot expect different intelligences to think alike.'
'I shall try to understand.'
The Cepheid's voice had grown soft, its liquid undertones more pronounced, 'We were dying on our native world; but we were fighting. Our science, developed through a history older than yours, was losing; but it had not yet lost. Perhans it was because our science was fundamentally biological. rather than physical as yours is. Your people discovered new forms of energy and reached the stars. Our people d:scovered new truths of psychology and psychiatry and built up a working society free of disease and crime.
'There is no need to question which of the two angles of approach was the more laudable, but there is no uncertainty as to which proved more successful in the end. In our dying world, without the means of life or sources of power, our biological science could but make the dying easier.
'And yet we fought. For centuries past, we had been groping toward the elements of atomic power, and slowly the spark of hope had glimmered that we might break through the two-dimensional limits of our planetary surface and reach the stars. There were no other planets in our system to serve as stepping stones. Nothing but some twenty light-years to the nearest star, without the knowledge of the possibility of the existence of other planetary systems, but rather of the contrary.
'But there is something in all life that insists on striving; even on useless striving. There were only five thousand of us left in the last days. Only five thousand. And our first ship was ready. It was experimental. It would probably have been a failure. But already we had all the principles of propulsion and navigation correctly worked out.'
There was a long pause, and the Cepheid's small black eyes seemed glazed in retrospect.
The newspaperman put in suddenly, from his corner, 'And then we came?'
'And then you came,' the Cepheid agreed simply. 'It changed everything. Energy was ours for the asking. A new world, congenial and, indeed, ideal, was ours even without asking. If our problems of society had long been solved by ourselves, our more difficult problems of environment were suddenly solved for us, no less completely.'
'Well?' urged Antyok.
'Well - it was somehow not well. For centuries, our ancestors had fought toward the stars, and now the stars suddenly proved to be the property of others. We had fought for life, and it had become a present handed to us by others. There is no longer any reason to fight. There is no longer anything to attain. All the universe is the property of your race.'
'This world is yours,' said Antyok, gently.
'By sufferance. It is a gift. It is not ours by right'
'You have earned it, in my opinion.'
And now the Cepheid's eyes were sharply fixed on the other's countenance, 'You mean well, but I doubt that you understand. We have nowhere to go, save this gift of a world. We are in a blind alley. The function of life is striving, and that is taken from us. Life can no longer interest us. We have no offspring - voluntarily. It is our way of removing ourselves from your way.'
Absent-mindedly, Antyok had removed the fluoro-globe from the window seat, and spun it on its base. Its gaudy surface reflected light as it spun, and its three-foot-high bulk floated with incongruous grace and lightness in the air.
Antyok said, 'Is that your only solution? Sterility?'
'We might escape still,' whispered the Cepheid, 'but where in the Galaxy is there place for us? It is all yours.'
'Yes, there is no place for you nearer than the Magellame Clouds if you wished independence. The Magellanic Clouds -'
'And you would not let us go of yourselves. You mean kindly, I know.'
'Yes, we mean kindly - but we could not let you go.'
'It is a mistaken kindness.'
'Perhaps, but could you not reconcile yourselves? You have a world.'
'It is something past complete explanations. Your mind is different. We could not reconcile ourselves. I believe, administrator, that you have thought of all this before. The concept of the blind alley we find ourselves trapped in is not new to you.'
Antyok looked up, startled, and one hand steadied the fluoro-globe, 'Can you read my mind?'
'It is just a guess. A good one, I think.'
'Yes - but can you read my mind? The minds of humans in general, I mean. It is an interesting point. The scientists say you cannot, but sometimes I wonder if it is that you simply will not. Could you answer that? I am detaining you, unduly, perhaps.'
'NoÖ no -' But the little Cepheid drew his enveloping robe closer, and buried his face in the electrically-heated pad at the collar for a moment. 'You other-worldlings speak of reading minds. It is not so at all, but it is assuredly hopeless to explain.'
Antyok mumbled the old proverb, 'One cannot explain sight to a man blind from birth.'
'Yes, just so. This sense which you call "mind reading," quite erroneously, cannot be applied to us. It is not that we cannot receive the proper sensations, it is that your people do not transmit them, and we have no way of explaining to you how to go about it.'
'Hm-m-m.'
'There are times, of course, of great concentration or emotional tension on the part of an other-worldling when some of us who are more expert in this sense; more sharp-eyed, so to speak; detect vaguely something. It is uncertain; yet I myself have at times wondered -'
Carefully, Antyok began spinning the fluoro-globe once more. His pink face was set in thought, and his eyes were fixed upon the Cepheid. Gustiv Bannerd stretched his fingers and reread his notes, his lips moving silently.
The fluoro-globe spun, and slowly the Cepheid seemed to grow tense as well, as his eyes shifted to the colorful sheen of the globe's fragile surface.
The Cepheid said, 'What is that?'
Antyok started, and his face smoothed into an almost chuckling placidity, 'This? A Galactic fad of three years ago; which means that it is a hopelessly old-fashioned relic this year. It is a useless device but it looks pretty. Bannerd, could you adjust the windows to non-transmission?'
There was the soft click of a contact, and the windows became curved regions of darkness, while in the center of the room, the fluoro-globe was suddenly the focus of a rosy effulgence that seemed to leap outward in streamers. Antyok, a scarlet figure in a scarlet room, placed it upon the table and spun it with a hand that dripped red. As it spun, the colors changed with a slowly increasing rapidity, blended and fell apart into more extreme contrasts.
Antyok was speaking in an eerie atmosphere of molten, shifting rainbow, 'The surface is of a material that exhibits variable fluorescence. It is almost weightless, extremely fragile, but gyroscopically balanced so that it rarely falls, with ordinary care. It is rather pretty, don't you think?'
From somewhere the Cepheid's voice came, 'Extremely pretty.'
'But it has outworn its welcome; outlived its fashionable existence.'
The Cepheid's voice was abstracted, 'It is very pretty.'
Bannerd restored the light at a gesture, and the colors faded.
The Cepheid said, 'That is something my people would enjoy.' He stared at the globe with fascination.
And now Antyok rose. 'You had better go. If you stay longer, the atmosphere may have bad effects. I thank you humbly for your kindness.'
'I thank you humbly for yours.' The Cepheid had also risen.
Antyok said, 'Most of your people, by the way, have accepted our offers to them to study the make-up of our modern spaceships. You understand, I suppose, that the purpose was to study the reactions of your people to our technology. I trust that conforms with your sense of propriety.'
'You need not apologize. I, myself, have now the makings of a human pilot. It was most interesting. It recalls our own efforts - and reminds us of how nearly on the right track we were.'
The Cepheid left, and Antyok sat, frowning.
'Well,' he said to Bannerd, a little sharply. 'You remember our agreement, I hope. This interview can't be published.'
Bannerd shrugged, 'Very well.'
Antyok was at his seat, and his fingers fumbled with the small metal figurine upon his desk, 'What do you think of all this, Bannerd?'
'I am sorry for them. I think I understand how they feel. We must educate them out of it. The Philosophy can do it.'
'You think so?'
'Yes.'
'We can't let them go, of course.'
'Oh, no. Out of the question. We have too much to learn from them. This feeling of theirs is only a passing stage. They'll think differently, especially when we allow them the completest independence.'
'Maybe. What do you think of the fluoro-globes, Bannerd? He liked them. It might be a gesture of the right sort to order several thousand of them. The Galaxy knows, they're a drug on the market right now, and cheap enough.'
'Sounds like a good idea,' said Bannerd.
'The Bureau would never agree, though. I know them.'
The newsman's eyes narrowed, 'But it might be just the thing. They need new interests.'
'Yes? Well, we could do something. I could include your transcript of the interview as part of a report and just emphasize the matter of the globes a bit. After all, you're a member of the Philosophy and might have influence with important people, whose word with the Bureau might carry much more weight than mine. You understand-?' 'Yes,' mused Bannerd. 'Yes.'



From:,AdHQ-Cephl8

To: BuOuProv

Subject: OuProv Project 2910, Part II; Birth rate of non-Humans on Cepheus 18, Investigation of.


Reference:
(a) BuOuProv letr. Cep-N-CM/car, 115097, dated 223/977 G.E.
Enclosure:
1. Transcript of conversation between L. Antyok of AdHQ-Ceph18, and Ni-San, High Judge of the non-Humans on Cepheus 18.
1. Enclosure 1 is forwarded herewith for the information of the BuOuProv.
2. The investigation of the subject undertaken in response to the authorization of reference (a) is being pursued along the new lines indicated in Enclosure 1. The BuOuProv is assured that every means will be used to combat the harmful psycho logical attitude at present prevalent among the non-Humans.
3. It is to be noted that the High Judge of the non-Humans on Cepheus 18 expressed interest in fluoro-globes. A prelimin ary investigation into this fact of non-Human psychology has been initiated.



L. Antyok, Superv.

AdHQ-Cephl8, 272/977 G.E.



From: BuOuProv 

To: AdHQ-Cephl8

Subject: OuProv Project 2910; Birth rate of non-Humans on Cepheus 18, Investigation of. Reference: (a) AdHQ-Ceph 18 letr. AA-LA/mn, dated 272/977 G.E.


1. With reference to Enclosure 1 of reference (a), five thou sand fluoro-globes have been allocated for shipment to Ceph eus 18, by the Department of Trade.
2. It is instructed that AdHQ-Ceph 18 make use of all meth ods of appeasing non-Humans' dissatisfaction, consistent with the necessities of obedience to Imperial proclamations.



C. Morily, Chief,

BuOuProv, 283/977 G.E.






V


The dinner was over, the wine had been brought in and the cigars were out. The groups of talkers had formed, and the captain of the merchant fleet was the center of the largest. His brilliant white uniform quite outsparkled his listeners.
He was almost complacent in his speech: The trip was nothing. I've had more than three hundred ships under me before this. Still, I've never had a cargo quite like this. What do you want with five thousand fluoro-globes on this desert, by the Galaxy!'
Loodun Antyok laughed gently. He shrugged, 'For the non-Humans. It wasn't a difficult cargo, I hope.'
'No, not difficult. But bulky. They're fragile, and I couldn't carry more than twenty to a ship, with all the government regulations concerning packing and precautions against breakage. But it's the government's money, I suppose.'
Zammo smiled grimly. 'Is this your first experience with government methods, captain?'
'Galaxy, no,' exploded the spaceman. 'I try to avoid it, of course, but you can't help getting entangled on occasion. And it's an abhorrent thing when you are, and that's the truth. The red tape! The paper work! It's enough to stunt your growth and curdle your circulation. It's a tumor, a cancerous growth on the Galaxy. I'd wipe out the whole mess.'
Antyok said, 'You're unfair, captain. You don't understand.'
'Yes? Well, now, as one of these bureaucrats,' and he smiled amiably at the word, 'suppose you explain your side of the situation, administrator.'
'Well, now,' Antyok seemed confused, 'government is a serious and complicated business. We've got thousands of planets to worry about in this Empire of ours and billions of people. It's almost past human ability to supervise the business of governing without the tightest sort of organization. I think there are something like four hundred million men today in the Imperial Administrative Service alone, and in order to coordinate their efforts and to pool their knowledge, you must have what you call red tape and paper work. Every bit of it, senseless though it may seem, annoying though it may be, has its uses. Every piece of paper is a thread binding the labors of four hundred million humans. Abolish the Administrative Service and you abolish the Empire; and with it, interstellar peace, order and civilization.'
'Come -' said the captain.
'No. I mean it.' Antyok was earnestly breathless. 'The rules and system of the Administrative set-up must be sufficiently all-embracing and rigid so that in case of incompetent officials, and sometimes one is appointed - you may laugh, but there are incompetent scientists, and newsmen, and captains, too - in case of incompetent officials, I say, little harm will be done. For, at the worst, the system can move by itself.'
'Yes,' grunted the captain, sourly, 'and if a capable administrator should be appointed? He is then caught by the same rigid web and is forced into mediocrity.'
'Not at all,' replied Antyok, warmly. 'A capable man can work within the limits of the rules and accomplish what he wishes.'
'How?' asked Bannerd.
'WellÖ well -' Antyok was suddenly ill at ease. 'One method is to get yourself an A-priority project, or double-A, if possible.'
The captain leaned his head back for laughter, but never quite made it, for the door was flung open and frightened men were pouring in. The shouts made no sense at first. Then:
'Sir, the ships are gone. These non-Humans have taken them by force.'
'What? All?'
'Every one. Ships and creatures -'
It was two hours later that the four were together again, alone in Antyok's office now.
Antyok said coldly, 'They've made no mistakes. There's not a ship left behind, not even your training ship, Zammo. And there isn't a government ship available in this entire half of the Sector. By the time we organize a pursuit they'll be out of the Galaxy and halfway to the Magellanic Clouds. Captain, it was your responsibility to maintain an adequate guard.'
The captain cried, 'It was our first day out of space. Who could have known -'
Zammo interrupted fiercely, 'Wait a while, captain. I'm beginning to understand. Antyok,' his voice was hard, 'you engineered this.'
'I?' Antyok's expression was strangely cool, almost indifferent.
'You told us this evening that a clever administrator got an A-priority project assigned to accomplish what he wished. You got such a project in order to help the non-Humans escape.'
1 did? I beg your pardon, but how could that be? It was you yourself in one of your reports that brought up the problem of the failing birth rate. It was Bannerd, here, whose sensational articles frightened the Bureau into making a double A-priority project out of it. I had nothing to do with it.'
'You suggested that I mention the birth rate,' said Zammo, violently.
'Did I?' said Antyok, composedly.
'And for that matter,' roared Bannerd, suddenly, 'you suggested that I mention the birth rate in my articles.'
The three ringed him now and hemmed him in. Antyok leaned back in his chair and said easily, 'I don't know what you mean by suggestions. If you are accusing me, please stick to evidence - legal evidence. The laws of the Empire go by written, filmed or transcribed material, or by witnessed statements. All my letters as administrator are on file here, at the Bureau, and at other places. I never asked for an A-priority project. The Bureau assigned it to me, and Zammo and Bannerd are responsible for that. In print, at any rate.'
Zammo's voice was an almost inarticulate growl, 'You hoodwinked me into teaching the creatures how to handle a spaceship.'
'It was your suggestion. I have your report proposing they be studied in their reaction to human tools on file. So has the Bureau. The evidence - the legal evidence, is plain. I had nothing to do with it.'
'Nor with the globes?' demanded Bannerd.
The captain howled suddenly, 'You had my ships brought here purposely. Five thousand globes! You knew it would require hundreds of craft.'
'I never asked for globes,' said Antyok, coldly. 'That was the Bureau's idea, although I think Bannerd's friends of The Phil-osphy helped that along.'
Bannerd fairly choked. He spat out, 'You were asking that Cepheid leader if he could read minds. You were telling him to express interest in the globes.'
'Come, now. You prepared the transcript of the conversation yourself, and that, too, is on file. You can't prove it.' He stood up, 'You'll have to excuse me. I must prepare a report for the Bureau.'
At the door, Antyok turned, 'In a way, the problem of the non-Humans is solved, even if only to their own satisfaction. They'll breed now, and have a world they've earned themselves. It's what they wanted.
'Another thing. Don't accuse me of silly things. I've been in the Service for twenty-seven years, and I assure you that my paper work is proof enough that I have been thoroughly correct in everything I have done. And captain, I'll be glad to continue our discussion of earlier this evening at your convenience and explain how a capable administrator can work through red tape and still get what he wants.'
It was remarkable that such a round, smooth baby-face could wear a smile quite so sardonic.



From: BuOuProv

To: Loodun Antyok, Chief Public Administrator, A-8

Subject: Administrative Service, Standing in.


Reference:
(a) AdServ Court Decision 22874-Q, dated 1 /978 G.E.
1. In view of the favorable opinion handed down in reference (a) you are hereby absolved of all responsibility for the flight of non-Humans on Cepheus 18. It is requested that you hold yourself in readiness for your next appointment.



R. Horpritt. Chief,

AdServ, 15/978 G.E.





***



The letters that form a major part of this story (which contains one of my rare examples of extraterrestrial intelligences) are, you will be glad to know, based on the kind of material that routinely passed in and out of the N.A.E.S. (and, for all I know, still does). The turgid style is not my invention. I couldn't invent it if I tried.
When the story appeared, L. Sprague de Camp happily pointed out one flaw in the letter style: I had carelessly made someone in lower position, who was addressing someone in higher position, say, 'it is requested' instead of 'it is suggested.' The underling can humbly suggest, but only an overling can harshly request.
'Blind Alley' has one distinction I would like to mention.
After the war, there began that flood of science fiction anthologies that has been growing in width and depth ever since. Few, if any, science fiction writers have been anthologized as often as I have and the first one of my stories to be anthologized was not 'Nightfall' or a 'positronic robot' story or a 'Foundation' story. It was 'Blind Alley.'
In early 1946 Groff Conklin was putting out the first of his many science fiction anthologies - one called 'The Best of Science Fiction' - and there you will find 'Blind Alley.' That story, for which Campbell had paid $148.75 (He a word) then earned another $42.50 Qc a word). This meant that 'Blind Alley' had earned me 21/4c a word, which was a record high at the time.
Strictly speaking, the money for the anthologization was paid to Street amp; Smith, but Street amp; Smith had the enlightened habit of turning such money over to the author - voluntarily and without legal compulsion. And this was the first indication I ever received, by the way, that a story could earn more money than that which it earned at the time of its original sale.
On May 8, 1945, one week before 'The Mule' was completed, the war ended in Europe. Naturally, there was at once a move to demobilize as many of the men who had been fighting in Europe as possible, and to draft replacements from among those who had luxuriated at home.
All through the war, till then, I had been receiving regular draft deferments as a research chemist working in a position important to the war effort. Periodically, there were revisions of the draft rules, and it was a rare month in which it did not look at one time or another as though I might be drafted. (It kept me on my toes, I can tell you, but I did not feel particularly ill-used. My predominant feeling was that of a sneaking guilt at not being drafted and some shame that I was relieved at my deferment.)
During 1944, the uncertainty went so far that I was called in for a physical examination, and it at once turned out that my nearsightedness was so bad as to render me ineligible for the draft anyway.
After V-E Day, the navy yard was ordered to retain only some percentage of those of its deferred employees, allowing the remainder to be drafted. Presumably, the navy yard would select its most important employees to keep, but they knew a better trick, according to the tale we employees heard. They retained all draftable employees who met the physical requirements, and removed protection from those who did not meet them either because of age or physical defect. In this way, they hoped to keep them all - those who were fit, because they were declared necessary, and those who were overage or unfit, because they were overage or unfit.
I, as an unfit employee, was one of those declared non-essential.
And then (you guessed it) the Army lowered its physical requirements. The result was that those navy yard employees with bad eyes or other mild deficiencies were put in imminent peril of the draft, while others, who were in every way equivalent except that they were in good shape, were not. (You may well laugh.)
For four months after V-E Day, it was up and down with me and the draft and I never knew, on one day, whether I might not receive my induction notice on the next. While I waited, the atom bombs were dropping on Hiroshima and Nagasaki and the Japanese formally surrendered on September 2.
On September 7, 1945, I received my notice of induction. I didn't enjoy it, of course, but I tried to be philosophical. The war was over, and, whatever difficulties I might have during the two years I expected to be in, at least no one would be shooting at me. I entered the Army on November 1, 1945, as a buck private.
Naturally, during all the fuss over the draft, culminating in my induction, I did no writing. There was an eight-month hiatus, in fact, the longest in three years.
On January 7, 1946, however, while I was still working my way through basic training in Camp Lee, Virginia, I began another 'positronic robot' story, called 'Evidence.' I made use of a typewriter in one of the administrative buildings.
Naturally, it was slow work. I didn't finish first draft till February 17, and then everything came to a halt when, the very next day, I discovered that I would be among those sent out to the South Pacific to participate in 'Operation Crossroads.' This was the first postwar atom bomb test, on the island of Bikini (which later gave its name to a bathing suit so skimpy as to react on the male constitution - in theory - like an atom bomb). The fact that a week later I received my check for the anthologization of 'Blind Alley' did little to raise my spirits.
We left on March 2, 1946, traveling by train and ship, and arrived in Honolulu on March 15. There then began a long wait before we could go on to Bikini (the atom bomb test was postponed, of course). When time began to hang heavy enough, I returned to 'Evidence.' I persuaded a sympathetic librarian to lock me up in the building when it closed for lunch so that I had an hour each day absolutely alone at the typewriter. I finished the story on April 10, and mailed it off to Campbell the next day.
On April 29, I received word of its acceptance. By that time, the word rate had reached two cents.
I never did go to Bikini, by the way. Some administrative error back home ended the allotment being sent to my wife. I was sent back to the United States on May 28 to inquire into the matter; it was all straightened out by the time I was back at Camp Lee. As long as I was there, however, I applied for a 'research discharge' on the ground that I was going back to my Ph.D work. I was out of the Army, as a corporal, on July 26.
'Evidence' was the only story I wrote while in uniform.
As soon as I got out of the Army I made arrangements to return to Columbia, after an absence of a little over four years, and to resume my work toward my Ph.D. under Professor Dawson.
There was still no question in my mind that chemistry was my career, and my only career. In the four years of my marriage I had written nine science fiction stories and one fantasy and had sold them all - but all the sales had been to Campbell.
Since Unknown had died, I was terribly conscious that Astounding might die as well. If that happened, or if Campbell retired, I was not at all sure that I could continue selling.
The situation looked better postwar than prewar, to be sure. During the first four years of my marriage, I had earned $2667 as a writer, or an average of under $13 per week. This was about half again as well as I had been doing in my bachelor days, even though I was writing fewer stories.
The word rate had doubled, you see, and there was even the hope of subsidiary rights - extra money for already sold stories. 'Blind Alley' had already placed in an anthology, and on August 30, 1946, only a month after I got out of the Army, I discovered that I had made a second such sale. A new science fiction anthology, 'Adventures in Time and Space,' edited by Raymond J. Healey and J. Francis McComas, was to include 'Nightfall' and I was to receive $66.50 for that.
There was even more than anthologization sales. In that same month of August, the September 1946 issue of Astounding hit the stands with 'Evidence' (Had I but known when writing it that by the time it was published I would be safely out of the Army!) Almost at once I received a telegram asking for the movie rights. The gentleman interested turned out to be none other than Orson Welles. In great excitement, I sold him the radio, television and movie rights to the story on September 20, and waited to become famous. (I couldn't become wealthy, because the entire payment in full was only $250.)
Unfortunately, nothing happened. To this day, Mr. Welles has never used the story. But the check was certainly useful toward paying my tuition.
Despite everything, though, it still seemed quite out of the question that I could ever possibly depend on writing for a year-in, year-out living, especially now that I was married and hoped, eventually, to have children.
So back to school it was, with a small savings account to serve as a cushion, with some veterans' benefits supplied by the government, and, of course, with the hope that I would make a little extra cash writing.
In September I wrote still another 'positronic robot' story, 'Little Lost Robot,' racing to complete it before the fall semester started and I grew immersed in my work. Campbell took it promptly and it appeared in the March 1947 issue of Astounding. Eventually, it and 'Evidence' were included in /, Robot.
Once the semester started, it became difficult to find time to write. Toward the end of 1946, I managed to begin another 'Foundation' story, 'Now You See It-.' I finished it on February 2, 1947, and submitted it to Campbell on the fourth. By that time I was rather sick of the 'Foundation' series and I tried to write 'Now You See It -' in such a way as to make it the last of the series.
Campbell would have none of that. I had to revise the ending to permit a sequel, and on the fourteenth he took it. It appeared in the January 1948 Astounding and eventually made up the first third of my book Second Foundation.
In May 1947 I wrote a story that, for the first time in over two years, was neither a 'Foundation' story nor a 'positronic robot' story. It was 'No Connection.' I submitted it to Campbell on May 26, and it was accepted on the thirty-first.






No Connection [5]


Raph was a typical American of his times. Remarkably ugly, too, by American standards of our times. The bony structure of his jaws was tremendous and the musculature suited it. His nose was arched and wide and his black eyes were small and forced wide apart by the span of said nose. His neck was thick, his body broad, his fingers spatulate, with strongly curved nails.
If he had stood erect, on thick legs with large, well-padded feet, he would have topped two and a half yards. Standing or sitting, his mass neared a quarter of a ton.
Yet his forehead rose in an unrestricted arc and his cranial capacity did not stint. His enormous hand dealt delicately with a pen, and his mind droned comfortably on as he bent over his desk.
In fact, his wife and most of his fellow-Americans found him a fine-looking fellow.
Which shows the alchemy of a long displacement along the time-axis.
Raph, Junior, was a smaller edition of our typical American. He was adolescent and had not yet lost the hairy covering of childhood. It spread in a dark, close-curled mat across his chest and back, but it was already thinning and perhaps within the year he would first don the adult shirt that would cover the proudly-naked skin of manhood.
But, meanwhile, he sat in breeches alone, and scratched idly at a favorite spot just above the diaphragm. He felt curious and just a little bored. It wasn't bad to come with his father to the museum when people were there. Today was a Closed-Day, however, and the empty corridors rang lonesomely when he walked along them.
Besides, he knew everything in it - mostly bones and stones.
Junior said: 'What's that thing?'
'What thing?' Raph lifted his head and looked over his shoulder. Then he looked pleased. 'Oh, that's something quite new. That's a reconstruction of Primate Primeval. It was sent to me from the North River Grouping. Isn't it a nice job though?' And he returned to his work, in the grip of a momentary twinge of pleasure. Primate Primeval wasn't to go on exhibition for a week at least - not until he prepared an honorable place for it with suitable surroundings, but, for the moment, it was in his office and his own private darling.
Raph looked at the 'nice job' with quite other emotions, however. What he saw was a spindly figure of contemptuous size, with thin legs and arms, hair-covered and owning an ugly, small-featured face with large, protruding eyes.
He said: 'Well, what is it, Pa?'
Raph stirred impatiently: 'It's a creature that lived many millions of years ago, we think. That's the way we think it looks.'
'Why?' insisted the youngster.
Raph gave up. Apparently, he would have to root out the subject and do away with it.
'Well, for one thing we can tell about the muscles from the shape of the bones, and the positions where the tendons would fit and where some of the nerves would go. From the teeth we can tell the type of digestive system the animal would have, and from the foot-bones, what type of posture it would have. For the rest, we go by the principle of Analogy, that is, by the outside appearance of creatures that exist today that have the same kind of skeleton. For instance, that's why he's covered with red hair. Most of the Primates today - they're little insignificant creatures, practically extinct - are red-haired, have bare callosities on the rump -'
Junior scurried behind the figure and satisfied himself on that score.
'-have long, fleshy probosces, and short, shriveled ears. Their diets are unspecialized, hence the rather all-purpose teeth, and they are nocturnal, hence the large eyes. It's all simple, really. Now, does that dispose of you, younester?'
And then Junior, having thought and thought about it, came out with a disparaging: 'He looks just like a Eekah to me, though. Just like an ugly, old Eekah.'
Raph stared at him. Apparently he had missed a point: 'An Eekah?' he said, 'What's an Eekah? Is that an imaginary creature you've been reading about?'
'Imaginary! Say, Pa, don't you ever stop at the Recorder's?'
This was an embarrassing question to answer, for 'Pa' never did, or at least, never since his maturity. As a child, the Recorder, as custodian of the world's spoken, written and recorded fiction, had, of course, had an unfailing fascination. But he had grown up -
He said, tolerantly: 'Are there new stories about Eekahs? I remember none when I was young.'
'You don't get it, Pa. ' One would almost suppose that the young Raph was on the very verge of an exasperation he was too cautious to express. He explained in wounded fashion: 'The Eekahs are real things. They come from the Other World. Haven't you heard about that! We've been hearing about it in school, even, and in the Group Magazine. They stand upside down in their country, only they don't know it, and they look just like Ol' Primeval there.'
Raph collected his astonished wits. He felt the incongruity of cross-examining his half-grown child for archaeological data and he hesitated a moment. After all, he had heard some things. There had been word of vast continents existing on the other hemisphere of Earth. It seemed to him that there were reports of life on them. It was all hazy - perhaps it wasn't always wise to stick so closely to the field of one's own interest.
He asked Junior: 'Are there Eekahs here among the Groupings?'
Junior nodded rapidly: 'The Recorder says they can think as good as us. They got machines that go through the air. That's how they got here.'
'Junior!' said Raph severely.
'I ain't lying,' Junior cried with aggrieved virtue. 'You ask the Recorder and see what he says.'
Raph slowly gathered his papers together. It was Closed-Day, but he could find the Recorder at his home, no doubt.
The Recorder was an elderly member of the Red River Gur-row Grouping and few alive could remember a time when he was not. He had succeeded to the post by general consent and filled it well, for he was Recorder for the same reason that Raph was curator of the museum. He liked to be, he wanted to be, and he could conceive no other life.
The social pattern of the Gurrow Grouping is difficult to grasp unless born into it, but there was a looseness about it that almost made the word 'pattern' incongruous. The individual Gurrow took whatever job he felt an aptitude for, and such work as was left over and needed to be done was done either in common, or consecutively by each according to an order determined by lot. Put so, it sounds too simple to work, but actually the traditions that had gathered with the five thousand years since the first Voluntary Grouping of Gurrahs was supposed to have been established, made the system complicated, flexible - and workable.
The Recorder was, as Raph had anticipated, at his home, and there was the embarrassment of renewing an old and unjustly neglected acquaintanceship. He had made use of the Recorder's reference library, of course, but always indirectly -yet he had once been a child, an intimate learner at the feet of accumulated wisdom, and he had let the intimacy lapse.
The room he now entered was more or less choked with recordings and, to a lesser degree, with printed material. The Recorder interspersed greetings with apologies.
'Shipments have come from some of the other Groupings,' he said. 'It needs time for cataloguing, you know, and I can't seem to find the time I used to.' He lit a pipe and puffed strongly. 'Seems to me I'll have to find a full-time assistant. What about your son, Raph? He clusters about here the way you did twenty years ago."
'You remember those times?'
'Better than you do, I think. Think your son would like that?'
'Suppose you talk to him. He might like to. I can't honestly say he's fascinated by archaeology.' Raph picked up a recording at random and looked at the identification tag: 'Um-m-m - from the Joquin Valley Grouping. That's a long way from here.'
'A long way.' The Recorder nodded. 'I have sent them some of ours, of course. The works of our own Grouping are highly regarded throughout the continent,' he said, with proprietary pride. 'In fact' - he pointed the stem of his pipe at the other -'your own treatise on extinct primates has been distributed everywhere. I've sent out two thousand copies and there are still requests. That's pretty good - for archaeology.'
'Well, archaeology is why I am here - that and what my son says you've been telling him.' Raph had a little trouble starting: 'It seems you have spoken of creatures called Eekahs from the Antipodes, and I would like to have such information as you have on them.'
The Recorder looked thoughtful: 'Well, I could tell you what I know offhand, or we could go to the Library and look up the references.'
'Don't bother opening the Library for me. It's a Closed-Day. Just give me some notion of things and I'll search the references later.'
The Recorder bit at his pipe, shoved his chair back against the wall and de-focused his eyes thoughtfully. 'Well,' he said, 'I suppose it starts with the discovery of the continents on the other side. That was five years ago. You know about that, perhaps?'
'Only the fact of it. I know the continents exist, as everyone does now. I remember once speculating on what a shining new field it would be for archaeological research, but that is all.'
'Ah, then there is much else to tell you of. The new continents were never discovered by us directly, you know. It was five years ago that a group of non-Gurrow creatures arrived at the East Harbor Grouping in a machine that flew - by definite scientific principles, we found out later, based essentially on the buoyancy of air. They spoke a language, were obviously intelligent, and called themselves Eekahs. The Gurrows, of the East Harbor Grouping, learned their language - a simple one though full of unpronounceable sounds - and I have a grammar of it, if you're interested -'
Raph waved that away.
The Recorder continued: The Gurrows of the Grouping, with the aid of those of the Iron Mountain Grouping - which specialize in steel works, you know - built duplicates of the flying machine. A flight was made across the ocean, and I should say there are several dozens of volumes on all that -volumes on the flying machine, on a new science called aerodynamics, new geographies, even a new system of philosophy based on the plurality of intelligences. All produced at the East Harbor and Iron Mountain Groupings. Remarkable work for only five years, and all are available here.'
'But the Eekahs - are they still at the East Harbor Groupings?'
'Um-m-m. I'm pretty certain they are. They refused to return to their own continents. They call themselves "political refugees."'
TolitiÖ what?'
'It's their own language,' said the Recorder, 'and it's the only translation available.'
'Well, why political refugees? Why not geological refugees, or oompah refugees. I should think a translation ought to make sense.'
The Recorder shrugged: 'I refer you to the books. They're not criminals, they claim. I know only what I tell you.'
'Well, then, what do they look like? Do you have pictures?'
'At the Library.'
'Did you read my "Principles of Archaeology?"'
'I looked through it.'
'Do you remember the drawings of Primate Primeval?'
Tm afraid not.'
'Then, look, let's go down to the Library, after all.'
'Well, sure.' The Recorder grunted as he rose.
The Administrator of the Red River Gurrow Grouping held a position in no way different in essentials from that of the Museum Curator, the Recorder or any other voluntary job holder. To expect a difference is to assume a society in which executive ability is rare.
Actually, all jobs in a Gurrow Grouping - where a 'job' is defined as regular work, the fruits of which adhere to others in addition to the worker himself - are divided into two classes: one, Voluntary Jobs, and the other, Involuntary or Community Jobs. All of the first classification are equal. If a Gurrow enjoys the digging of useful ditches, his bent is to be respected and his job to be honored. If no one enjoys such burrowing and yet it is found necessary for comfort, it becomes a Community Job, done by lot or rotation according to convenience - annoying but unavoidable.
And so it was that the Administrator lived in a house no more ample and luxurious than others, sat at the head of no tables, had no particular title other than the name of his job, and was neither envied, hated, nor adored.
He liked to arrange Inter-Group trade, to supervise the common finances of the Group, and to judge the infrequent disagreements that arose. Of course, he received no additional food or energy privileges for doing what he liked.
It was not, therefore, to obtain permission, but to place his accounts in decent order, that Raph stopped in to see the Administrator. The Closed-Day had not yet ended. The Administrator sat peacefully in his after-dinner armchair, with an after-dinner cigar in his mouth, and an after-dinner book in his hand. Although there was something rather timeless about six children and a wife, even they had an after-dinner air about them.
Raph received a multiple greeting upon entering, and raised two hands to his ears, for if the various Administratelets (Only applicable title. Author.) had a job, it was noisemaking. Certainly, it was what they liked to do, and certainly others reaped most of the fruits therefrom, for their own eardrums were apparently impervious.
The Administrator shooed them.
Raph accepted a cigar.
'I intend leaving the Grouping for a time, Lahr,' he said. 'My job necessitates it.'
'We won't enjoy your going, Raph. I hope it will not be for long.'
'I hope not. What have we in Common Units?'
'Oh, ample for your purposes, I'm sure. Where do you intend going?'
'To the East Harbor Grouping.'
The Administrator nodded and blew out a thoughtful puff of smoke: 'Unfortunately, East Harbor has a surplus in their favor registered in our books - I can verify that, if you wish -but the Common Units of Exchange on hand will take care of transportation and necessary expenses.'
'Well, that's fine. But tell me, what is my status on the Community Job Roster?'
'Um-m-m - I'll have to get the rolls. You'll excuse me a moment.' He trundled away, heaving his great weight across the room and out into the hallway. Raph paused to poke at the youngest of the children who rolled up to him, growling in mock ferocity with gleaming teeth - a black little bundle of thick fur, with the long, childish snout that had not yet broadened away from the shape of the animal ancestry of half a million years earlier.
The Administrator returned with a heavy ledger and large spectacles. He opened the ledger meticulously, riffled the pages to the proper place and then drew a careful finger down the columns.
He said: There's only the question of water supply, Raph. You're due on the Maintenance gang for this next week. There's nothing else due for at least two months.'
'I'll be back before then. Is there any chance of someone subbing for me on the Water Maintenance?'
'Um-m-m - I'll get someone. I can always send my oldest. He's getting to job age and he might as well taste everything. He may like working on the dam.'
'Yes? You tell me if he does, then. He can replace me, regularly.'
The Administrator smiled gently: 'Don't plan on that, Raph. If he can figure out a way of making sleeping useful to all of us, he'll certainly take it up as a job. And why are you going to East Harbor Grouping, by the way, if it's something you care to talk about?'
'You'll laugh, perhaps, but I have just found out that there exist such things as Eekahs.'
'Eekahs? Yes, I know.' The Administrator pointed a finger. 'Creatures from across the sea! Right?'
'Right! But that's not all. I've come from the Library. I've seen trimensional reproductions, Lahr, and they're Primate Primeval, or almost. They're primates, anyway, intelligent primates. They've got small eyes, flat noses and completely different jawbones - but they're at least second cousins. I've got to see them, Lahr.'
The Administrator shrugged. He felt no interest in the matter himself. 'Why? I ask out of ignorance, Raph. Does it matter, your seeing them?'
'Matter?' Raph was obviously appalled at the question. 'Don't you know what's been going on these last years? Have you read my archaeology book?'
'No,' said the Administrator, definitely, 'I wouldn't read it to save myself a turn at Garbage Disposal.'
Raph said: 'Which probably proves you more suited to Garbage Disposal than archaeology. But never mind. I've been fighting single-handed for nearly ten years in favor of my theory that Primate Primeval was an intelligent creature with a developed civilization. I have nothing on my side so far but logical necessity, which is the last thing most archaeologists will accept. They want something solid. They want the remains of a Grouping, or artifacts, structures, books - get it. All I can give them is a skeleton with a huge brain-pan. Stars above, Lahr, what do they expect to survive in ten million years? Metal dies. Paper dies. Film dies.
'Only stone lasts, Lahr. And bone that's turned to stone. I've got that. A skull with room for a brain. And stone, too, old sharpened knives. Ground flints.'
'Well,' said Lahr, 'there are your artifacts.'
'Those are called eoliths, dawn stones. They won't accept them. They call them natural products, fortuitously shaped by erosion into the shapes they have, the idiots.'
Then he grinned with a scientific ferocity: 'But if the Eekahs are intelligent primates, I've practically proven my case."
Raph had traveled before, but never eastward, and the decline of agriculture on the road impressed him. In early history, the Gurrow Groupings had been entirely unspecialized. Each had been self-sufficient, and trade was a gesture of friendliness rather than a matter of necessity.
And so it was still in most Groupings. His own Grouping, the Red River, was perhaps typical. Some five hundred miles inland, set in lush farm land, agriculture remained centric. The river yielded some fish and there was a well-developed dairy industry. In fact, it was food exports that provided cause for the healthy state of the store of Common Units.
As they traveled eastward, however, the Groupings through which they passed paid less and less mind to the shallowing soil and more and more to the smoking factory structures.
In the East Harbor Grouping, Raph found a trading center which depended for its prosperity primarily upon ships. It was a more populous Grouping than the average, more densely packed, with houses, on occasion, within a hundred yards of each other.
Raph felt an uncomfortable prickling at the thought of living in such close quarters. The docks were even worse, with Gurrows engaged at the huge Community Jobs of loading and unloading.
The Administrator of this East Harbor Grouping was a young man, new at his job, overwhelmed with the joy of his work, and beside himself with the pleasure of welcoming a distinguished stranger.
Raph sat through an excellent meal, and was treated to a long discourse as to the exact derivation of each dish. To his provincial ears, beef from the Prairie Grouping, potatoes from the Northeast Woods Grouping, coffee from the Isthmus Grouping, wine from the Pacific Grouping, and fruit from the Central Lakes Grouping were something strange and wonderful.
Over the cigars - South Island Grouping - he brought up the subject of the Eekahs. The East Harbor Administrator grew solemn and a little uneasy.
'The man you want to see is Lernin. He'll be glad to help you all he can. You say you know something of these Eekahs?'
'I say I would like to know something. They resemble an extinct species of animal I am familiar with.'
'Then that is your field of interest. I see.'
'Perhaps you can tell me some of the details of their arrival, Administrator,' suggested Raph, politely.
'I was not Administrator at the time, friend, so that I lack first-hand information, but the records are plain. This group of Eekahs that arrived in their flying-machineÖ you've heard about these aeronautical devices?'
'Yes, yes.'
'Yes. WellÖapparently they were fugitives.'
'So I have heard. Yet they claim not to be criminals. Isn't that so?'
'Yes. Queer, isn't it? They admitted that they had been condemned - this was after long and skillful questioning, once we had learned their language - but denied that they were evildoers. Apparently, they had disagreed with their Administrator on principles of policy.'
Raph nodded his head knowingly: 'Ah, and refused to abide by the common decision. Is that it?'
'More confusing than that. They insist there was no common decision. They claim that the Administrator decided on policy of his own accord.'
'And was not replaced?'
'Apparently those who believe he should are considered criminals - as these were.'
There was a frank pause of disbelief. Then Raph said: 'Does that sound reasonable to you?'
'No, I merely relay to you their words. Of course, the Eekah language is quite a barrier. Some of the sounds can't be pronounced: words have different meanings according to position in the sentence and according to tiny differences in inflection. And it happens often that Eekah words even when best translated are a complete puzzle.'
'They must have heen surprised to find Gurrows here,' suggested Raph, 'if they are members of a different genus.'
'Surprised!' The Administrator's voice sank: 'I'll say they were surprised. Now, this information has not been generally published for obvious reasons, so I hope you remember that it's confidential. These Eekahs killed five Gurrows before they could be disarmed. They had an instrument that expelled metal pellets at high speed by means of controlled explosive chemical reaction. We have duplicated it since. Naturally, under the circumstances, we are not branding them criminals, for it is reasonable to assume that they did not realize we were intelligent beings. Apparently,' and the Administrator smiled ruefully, 'we resemble certain animals in their world. Or so they say.'
But Raph was galvanized into a sudden enthusiasm: 'Stars above! They said that, did they? Did they go into details? What kind of animals?'
The Administrator was taken back: 'Well, I don't know. They give names in their language. What meaning has that? They called us giant "bears."'
'Giant what?'
'Bears. I haven't the slightest idea what they are, except presumably that they look like us. I know of no such in America.'
'Bears. Bears.' Raph stumbled over the word. 'That's interesting. It's more than interesting. It's stupendous. Do you know, Administrator, that there is a great dispute among us as to the ancestry of Gurrows? Living animals related to Gurrow sapiens would be of immense importance.' Raph rubbed his huge hands with pleasure.
The Administrator was pleased at the sensation he had caused. He said: 'And a puzzling thing in addition is that they call themselves by two names.'
Two names?"
'Yes. No one knows the distinction yet, no matter how much the Eekahs explain it to us, except that one is a more general name, and one a more specific. The basis of the difference escapes us.'
'I see. Which is "Eekah"?'
'That is the specific one. The general one is' - the Administrator stumbled slowly over the harsh syllables - 'Chim-pan zee. There, that's it. There are a group called Eekahs and there are other groups with other names. But they are all called ChimÖ what I said before.'
The Administrator sought through his mind for other juicy items of miscellany with which he was acquainted, but Raph interrupted him.
'May I see Lemin tomorrow?'
'Of course.'
'Then I shall do so. Thank you for your courtesy, Administrator.'
Lernin was a slight individual. It is doubtful if he weighed more than two hundred and fifty. There was also an imperfection in his walk, a slight lameness. But neither of these facts made much of an impression on Raph once the conversation had begun, for Lernin was a thinker who could impose his vigor upon others.
It was Raph whose eagerness dominated the first half of the conversation, and Lernin's comments were as luminous and as brief as lightning flashes. And then, there was a sudden whirl of the center of gravity, and Lernin took over.
'You will excuse me, learned friend,' Lernin said with a characteristic stiffness that he could make so amiable, 'if I find your problem unimportant. No, no' - he lifted a long-fingered hand - 'not, in the uncomplicated talk of the times, merely unimportant to myself because my interest lies elsewhere, but unimportant to the Grouping of all the Groupings - to every single Gurrow from end to end of the world.'
The concept was staggering. For a moment, Raph was offended; offended deep in his sense of individuality. It showed in his face.
Lernin added quickly: 'It may sound impolite, crude, uncivilized. But I must explain. I must explain because you are primarily a social scientist and will understand - perhaps better than we ourselves.'
'My life-interest,' said Raph angrily, 'is important to myself. I cannot assume those of others in preference.'
'What I talk about should be the life-interest of all - if only because it may be the means of saving the lives of all of us.'
Raph was beginning to suspect all sorts of things from a queer form of joking to the unbalance of mind that sometimes came with age. Yet Lemin was not old.
Lernin said, with an Impressive fervor: 'The Eekahs of the other world are a danger to us, for they are iiot friendly to us.'
And Raph replied naturally: 'How do you know?'
'No one other than myself, my friend, has lived more closely with these Eekahs who have arrived here, and I find them people with minds of emotional content strange to us. I have collected queer facts which we find difficult to interpret, but which point, at any rate, in disquieting directions.
'I'll list a few: Eekahs in organized groups kill one another periodically for obscure reasons. Eekahs find it impossible to live in manner other than those of ants - that is, in huge conglomerate societies - yet find it impossible to allow for the presence of one another. Or, to use the terminology of the social scientists, they are gregarious without being social, just as we Gurrows are social without being gregarious. They have elaborate codes of behavior, which, we are told, are taught to the young, but which are disobeyed in universal practice, for reasons obscure to us. Et cetera. Et cetera. Et cetera.'
'I am an archaeologist,' said Raph, stiffly. 'These Eekahs are of interest to me biologically only. If the curvature of the thigh bone is known to me, I care little for the curvature of their cultural processes. If I can follow the shape of the skull, it is immaterial to me that the shape of their ethics is mysterious.'
'You don't think that their insanities may affect us here?'
'We are six thousand miles apart, or more, along either ocean,' said Raph. 'We have our world. They have theirs. There is no connection between us.'
'No connection,' mused Lernin, 'so others have said. No connection at all. Yet Eekahs have reached us, and others may follow. We are told that the other world is dominated by a few, who are in turn dominated by their queer need for security which they confuse with an Eekah word called "power," which, apparently, means the prevailing of one's own will over the sum of the will of the community. What if this "power" should extend to us?'
Raph bent his mind to the task. The matter was utterly ridiculous. It seemed impossible to picture the strange concepts.
Lernin said: 'These Eekahs say that their world and ours in the long past were closer together. They say that there is a well-known scientific hypothesis in their world of a continental drift. That may interest you, since otherwise you might find it difficult to reconcile the existence of fossils of Primate Primeval closely related to living Eekahs six thousand miles away.'
And the mists cleared from the archaeologist's brain as he glanced up with a live interest untroubled by insanities: 'Ah, you should have said this sooner.'
'I say it now as an example of what you may achieve for yourself by joining us and helping us. There is another thing. These Eekahs are physical scientists, like ourselves here in East Harbor, but with a difference dictated by their own cultural pattern. Since they live in hives, they think in hives, and their science is the result of an ant-society. Individually, they are slow and unimaginative; collectively, each supplies a crumb different from that supplied by his fellow - so that a vast structure is erected quickly. Here the individual is infinitely brighter, but he works alone. You, for instance, know nothing of chemistry, I imagine.'
'A few of the fundamentals, but nothing else,' admitted Raph. 'I leave that, naturally, to the chemist.'
'Yes, naturally. But I am a chemist. Yet these Eekahs, though my mental inferiors, and no chemists in their own world, know more chemistry than I. For instance, did you know that there exist elements that spontaneously disintegrate?'
'Impossible,' exploded Raph. 'Elements are eternal, changeless-'
Lernin laughed: 'So you have been taught. So I have been taught. So I taught others. Yet the Eekahs are right, for in my laboratories I have checked them, and in every detail they are right. Uranium gives rise to a spontaneous radiation. You've heard of uranium, of course? And furthermore, I have detected radiations of energy beyond that produced by uranium which must be due to traces of elements unknown to us but described by the Eekahs. And these missing elements fit well into the so-called Periodic Tables some chemists have tried to foist upon the science. Though I do wrong to use the word "foist" now,'
'Well,' said Raph, 'why do you tell me this? Does this, too, help me in my problem?'
'Perhaps,' said Lernin, ironically, 'you will yet find it a royal bribe. You see, the energy production of uranium is absolutely constant. No known outward change in environment can affect it - and as a result of the loss in energy, uranium slowly turns to lead at an absolutely constant rate. A group of our men is even now using this fact as a basis for a method of determining the age of the earth. You see, to determine the age of a stratum of rock in Ñ the earth, then, it is but necessary to discover a region in it containing a trace of uranium - a widely spread element - and to determine about it the quantity of lead - and I might here add that the lead produced from uranium differs from ordinary lead and can be easily characterized -and it is then simple to determine the length of time in which that stratum has been solid. And of course, if a fossil is found in that stratum, it is of the same age, am I not correct?'
'Stars above,' and Raph rose to his feet in a tremble, 'you do not deceive me? It is really possible to do this?'
'It is possible. It is even easy. I tell you that our great defense, even at this late date, is co-operation in science. We are a group now of many, my friend, from many Groupings, and we want you among us. If you join us, it would be a simple matter to extend our earthage project to such regions as you may indicate - regions rich in fossils. What do you say?'
'I will help you.'
It is doubtful if the Gurrow Groupings had ever before seen a community venture of such breadth as now took place. East Harbor Grouping, as has been remarked, was a shipping center, and certainly a trans-Atlantic vessel was not beyond the capacity of a Grouping that traded along the full lengths of both coasts of the Americas. What was unusual was the vast-ness of the co-operation of Gurrows from many Groupings, Gurrows of many interests.
Not that they were all happy.
Raph, for instance, on the particular morning that now concerns us, six months from the date of his first arrival in East Harbor, was searching anxiously for Lernin.
Lernin, for his part, was searching for nothing but greater speed.
They met on the docks, where Lernin, biting the end off a cigar and leading the way to a region where smoking was permitted, said: 'And you, my friend, seem concerned. Not, certainly, about the progress of our ocean liner?'
'I am concerned,' said Raph, gravely, 'about the reports I have received of the expedition testing the age of the rocks.'
'Oh - And you are unhappy about it?'
'Unhappy!' exploded Raph. 'Have you seen them?'
'I have received a copy. I have looked at it. I have even read parts of it. But I have had little time and most of it bounced off. Will you please enlighten me?"
'Certainly. In the last several months, three of the regions I have indicated as being fossiliferous have been tested. The first region was in the area of East Harbor Grouping itself. Another was in the Pacific Bay Grouping, and a third in the Central Lakes Grouping. I purposely asked that those be done first because they are the richest areas and because they are widely separated. Do you know, for instance, what age they tell me the rocks upon which we stand are?'
Two billion years, I think, is the oldest figure I noticed.'
'And that's the figure for the oldest rocks - the basic igneous stratum of basalt. The upper strata, however - the recent sedimentary layers containing dozens of fossils of Primate Primeval - how old do you think these are supposed to be? Five -hundred - trillion - years! How is that? Do you understand?'
Trillion?' Lernin squinted upwards and shook his head.
That's strange.'
'I'll add to it. The Pacific Coast Grouping is one hundred trillion years old - so I am told - and Central Lakes almost eighty trillion years old.'
Lernin said: 'And the other measurements? The ones that did not involve your strata?'
'That is the most peculiar thing of all. Most of the chosen investigations were carried on in strata that were not particularly fossiliferous. They had their own criteria of choice based on geological reasoning - and they got consistent results - one million to two billion years depending upon the depth and geological history of the particular region tested. Only my areas give these strange and impossible vagaries.'
And Lernin said, 'But what do the geologists say about all this? Can there be some error?'
'Undoubtedly. But they have fifty decent, reasonable measurements. For themselves, they have proved the method and are happy. There are three anomalies, to be sure, but they view them with equanimity as involving some unknown factors. I don't see it that way. These three measurements mean everything.' Raph interrupted himself fiercely: 'How sure are you that radioactivity is an absolute constant?'
'Sure? Can one ever be sure? Nothing we know of so far affects it, and such is likewise the definite testimony of our Eekahs. Besides, my friend, if you are implying that radioactivity was more extensive in the past than in the present, why only in your fossil regions? Why not everywhere?'
'Why, indeed? It's another aspect of a problem which is growing more important daily. Consider. We have regions which show a past of abnormal radioactivity. We have regions which show abnormal fossil frequencies. Why should these regions coincide, Lernin?'
'One obvious answer suggests itself, my friend. If your Primate Primeval existed at a time when certain regions were highly radioactive, certain individuals would wander into them and die. Radioactive radiation is deadly in excess, of course. Radioactivity and fossils, there you are.'
'Why not other creatures,' demanded Raph. 'Only Primate Primeval occurs in excess, and he was intelligent. He would not be trapped by dangerous radiation.'
'Perhaps he was not intelligent. That is, after all, only your theory and not a proven fact.'
'Certainly, then, he was more intelligent than his small-brained contemporaries.'
'Perhaps not even that. You romanticize too much.'
'Perhaps I do.' Raph spoke in half a whisper. 'It seems to me that I can conjure up visions of a great civilization of a million years back - or more. A great power; a great intelligence - that has vanished completely, except for the tiny whispers of ossified bones which retain that huge cavity in which a brain once existed, and a bony five-fingered hand curving into slender signs of manipulative skill - with an opposing thumb. They must have been intelligent.'
Then, what killed them?' Lernin shrugged: 'Several million species of living things have survived.'
Raph looked up, half in anger: 'I cannot accompany your group, Lernin, on a Voluntary basis. To go to the other world would be useful, yes, if I could engage in my own studies. For your purposes, it can be only a Community Job to me. I cannot give my heart to it.'
But Lernin's jaw was set: 'That arrangement would not be fair. There are many of us, my friend, who are sacrificing our own interests. If we all placed them first and investigated the other world in terms of our own particular provincialisms only, our great purpose would be destroyed. My friend, there is not one of our men that we can spare. We must all work as if our lives depended on our instant solution of the Eekah problem, which, believe me, it does.'
Raph's jaws twisted in distaste. 'On your side, you have a vague apprehension of these weak, stupid little creatures. On my side I have a definite problem of great intellectual attraction to myself. And between the two I can see no connection -no possible connection at all.'
'Nor can I. But listen to me a moment. A small group of our most trusted men returned last week from a visit to the other world. It was not official, as ours will be. It made no contacts. It was a frank piece of espionage, which I am telling you about now. I ask your discretion on the matter.'
'Naturally.'
'Our men possessed themselves of Eekah event-sheets.'
'Pardon me?'
'It is a created name to describe the objects. Printed records are issued daily in the various centers of Eekah population of events and occurrences of the day, and what passes for literary efforts as well.'
Raph was momentarily interested: 'It strikes me as an excellent idea.'
'Yes, in its essence. The Eekah notion of interesting events, however, appears to consist entirely of antisocial events. However, leave that be. My point is that the existence of the Americas is well-known there these days - and it is universally spoken of as a "new land of opportunity." The various divisions of Eekahs eye it with a universal desire. The Eekahs are many, they are crowded, their economy is irrational. They want new land, and that is what this is to them - new and empty land.'
'Not empty,' pointed out Raph, mildly.
'Empty to them,' insisted Lernin terribly. 'That is the vast danger. Lands occupied by Gurrows are to them empty and they mean to take it, all the more so since they have often enough striven to take the lands of one another.'
Raph shrugged: 'Even so, they -'
'Yes. They are weak and stupid. You said that, and so they are. But only singly. They will unite for a purpose. To be sure, they will fall apart when the purpose is done - but momentarily they will join and become strong, which we perhaps cannot do, witness yourself. And their weapons of war have been keened in the fire of conflict. Their flying machines, for instance, are superb war weapons.'
'But we have duplicated it -'
'In quantity? We have also duplicated their chemical explosives, but only in the laboratory, and their firing tubes and armored vehicles, but only in experimental plants. And yet there is more - something developed within the last five years, for our own Eekahs know nothing about it.'
'And what is that?'
'We don't know. Their event-sheets speak of it - the names applied to it mean nothing to us - but the context implies the terror of it, even on the part of these kill-mad Eekahs. There seems no evidence that it has been used, or that all the Eekah groups have it - but it is used as a supreme threat. It will perhaps be clearer to you when all the evidence is presented once our voyage is under way.'
'But what is it? You talk of it as if it were a bogey.'
'Why, they talk of it as if it were a bogey. And what could be a bogey to an Eekah? That is the most frightening aspect of it. So far, we know only that it involves the bombardment of an element they call plutonium - of which we have never heard and of which our own Eekahs have never heard either - by objects called neutrons, which our Eekahs say are subatomic particles without charge, which seems to us completely ridiculous.'
'And that is all?'
'All. Will you suspend judgment till we show you the sheets?'
Raph nodded reluctantly: 'Very well.'
Raph's leaden thoughts revolved in their worn groove as he stood there alone.
Eekahs and Primate Primeval. A living creature of erratic habits and a dead creature that must have aspired to heights. A sordid present of explosives and neutron bombardments and a glorious, mysterious past -
No connection! No connection!



***



By June 1947 I had already been working on my Ph.D. research with near-total concentration (I was no longer working in the candy store; my younger brother, Stanley, had taken over) for nearly a year. I was in the home stretch and beginning to think forward to writing my Ph.D. dissertation. I rather dreaded that, since the obligatory style of dissertations is turgid in the extreme, and I had by now spent nine years trying to write well and was afraid I simply might not be able to write badly enough to qualify for my degree.
The experiments I was doing at the time required me, periodically, to dissolve a compound called catechol in water. The catechol existed in fine, feathery, fluffy needles that dissolved very readily in water. In fact, when I sprinkled catechol into the beaker of water, the individual needles dissolved as soon as they struck the water surface. Idly, it occurred to me that if the catechol were any more soluble than it was, it would dissolve before it struck the water surface.
Naturally, I thought at once that this notion might be the basis for an amusing story. It occurred to me, however, that instead of writing an actual story based on the idea, I might write up a fake research paper on the subject and get a little practice in turgid writing.
I did the job on June 8, 1947, even giving it the kind of long-winded title that research papers so often have - 'The Endo-chronic Properties of Resublimated Thiotimoline' - and added tables, graphs and fake references to non-existent journals.
I was not at all sure that Thiotimoline' (no use trying to quote the entire name every time) was publishable. Astounding, however, ran serious articles on scientific subjects of particular interest to science fiction readers and I thought it just possible Campbell might be interested in a gag article that would be on the borders of science fiction.
I brought it in to him on the tenth, and he took it almost at once.






The Endochronic Properties of Resublimated Thiotimoline [6]


The correlation of the structure of organic molecules with their various properties, physical and chemical, has in recent years afforded much insight into the mechanism of organic reactions, notably in the theories of resonance and mesomer-ism as developed in the last decade. The solubilities of organic compounds in various solvents has become of particular interest in this connection through the recent discovery of the endochronic nature of thiotimoline.
It has been long known that the solubility of organic compounds in polar solvents such as water is enhanced by the presence upon the hydrocarbon nucleus of hydrophilic - i.e., water-loving - groups, such as the hydroxy (-OH), amino (-NH2), or sulfonic acid (SO3H) groups. Where the physical characteristics of two given compounds - particularly the degree of subdivision of the material - are equal, then the time of solution - expressed in seconds per gram of material per milli-liter of solvent - decreases with the number of hydrophilic groups present. Catechol, for instance, with two hydroxy groups on the benzene nucleus, dissolves considerably more quickly than does phenol, with only one hydroxy group on the nucleus. Feinschreiber and Hravlek in their studies on the problem have contended that with increasing hydrophilism, the time of solution approaches zero. That this analysis is not entirely correct was shown when it was discovered that the compound thiotimoline will dissolve in water - in the proportions of 1 gm./ml. - in minus 1.12 seconds. That is, it will dissolve before the water is added.
Previous communications from these laboratories indicated thiotimoline to contain at least fourteen hydroxy groups, two amino groups and one sulfonic acid group. The presence of a nitro group (-NO2) in addition has not yet been confirmed, and no evidence as yet exists as to the nature of the hydrocarbon nucleus, though an at least partly aromatic structure seems certain of solution of thiotimoline quantitatively met with considerable difficulty because of the very negative nature of the value. The fact that the chemical dissolved prior to the addition of the water made the attempt natural to withdraw the water after solution and before addition. This, fortunately for the law of Conservation of Mass-Energy, never succeeded, since solution never took place unless the water was eventually added. The question is, of course, instantly raised as to how the thiotimoline can 'know' in advance whether the water will ultimately be added or not. Though this is not properly within our province as physical chemists, much recent material has been published within the last year upon the psychological and philosophical problems thereby posed.
Nevertheless, the chemical difficulties involved rest in the fact that the time of solution varies enormously with the exact mental state of the experimenter. A period of even slight hesitation in adding the water reduces the negative time of solution, not infrequently wiping it out below the limits of detection. To avoid this, a mechanical device has been constructed, the essential design of which has already been reported in a previous communication.6 This device, termed the endochronometer, consists of a cell 2 cubic centimeters in size into which a desired weight of thiotimoline is placed, making certain that a small hollow extension at the bottom of the solution cell - 1 millimeter in internal diameter - is filled. To the cell is attached an automatic pressure micro-pipette containing a specific volume of the solvent concerned. Five seconds after the circuit is closed, this solvent is automatically delivered into the cell containing the thiotimoline. During the time of action, a ray of light is focused upon the small cell-extension described above, and at the instant of solution, the transmission of this light will no longer be impeded by the presence of solid thiotimoline. Both the instant of solution - at which time the transmission of light is recorded by a photoelectric device - and the instant of solvent addition can be determined with an accuracy of better than 0.01 %. If the first value is subtracted from the second, the time of solution (T) can be determined.
The entire process is conducted in a thermostat maintained at 25.00∞ C. - to an accuracy of 0.01 ∞ C.
Thiotimoline Purity - The extreme sensitivity of this method highlights the deviations resulting from trifling impurities present in thiotimoline. (Since no method of laboratory synthesis of the substance has been devised, it may be practically obtained only through tedious isolation from its natural source, the bark of the shrub Rosacea Karlsbadensis rugo.) Great efforts were therefore made to purify the material through repeated recrystallizations from conductivity water - twice redistilled in an all-tin apparatus - and through final sublimations. A comparison of the solution times (T) at various stages of the purification process is shown in Table I.



Table I



Averaee'T'
Purification stage (12 obser-'T' extremes % error 
vations)


As isolated  -0.72 -0.25; -1.0134.1
First recrystallization -0.95 -0.84; -1.099.8
Second recrystallization -1.05 -0.99; -1.104.0
Third recrystallization  -1.11 -1.08; -1.131.8
Fourth recrystallization-1.12 -1.10; -1.13 1.7
First resublimation -1.12-1.11; -1.13 0.9
Second resublimation -1.122-1.12; -1.13 0.7


It is obvious from Table I that for truly quantitative significance, thiotimoline purified as described must be used. After the second resublimation, for instance, the error involved in an even dozen determinations is less than 0.7%, with the extreme values being -1.119 seconds and -1.126 seconds.
In all experiments described subsequently in this study, thiotimoline so purified has been used.
Time of Solution and Volume of Solvent - As would seem reasonable, experiments have shown that increasing the volume of solvent enables the thiotimoline to dissolve more quickly - i.e., with an increasingly negative time of solution. From Figure 1, however, we can see that this increase in endo-chronic properties levels off rapidly after a volume of solvent of approximately 1.25 ml. This interesting plateau effect has appeared with varying volume of solvent for all varieties of solvents used in these laboratories, just as in all cases the time of solution approaches zero with decreasing volume of solvent.
Time of Solution and Concentration of a Given Ion - In Figure 2, the results are given of the effect of the time of solution (T) of varying the volume of solvent, where the solvent consists of varying concentrations of sodium chloride solution. It can be seen that, although in each case the volume at which this plateau is reached differs markedly with the concentration, the heights of the plateau are constant (i.e. -1.13). The volume at which it is reached, hereinafter termed the Plateau Volume (PV), decreases with decreasing concentration of sodium chloride, approaching the PV for water as the NaCl concentration approaches zero. It is, therefore, obvious that a sodium chloride solution of unknown concentration can be quite accurately characterized by the, determination of its PV, where other salts are absent.






Figure 1







Figure 2







Figure 3



This usefulness of PV extends to other ions as well. Figure 3 gives the endochronic curves for 0.001 molar solutions of sodium chloride, sodium bromide and potassium chloride. Here, the PV in each case is equal within the limits of experimental error - since the concentrations in each case are equal - but the Plateau Heights (PH) are different.
A tentative conclusion that might be reached from this experimental data is that the PH is characteristic of the nature of the ions present in solution, whereas the PV is characteristic of the concentration of these ions. Table II gives the values of Plateau Height and Plateau Volume for a wide variety of salts in equal concentrations, when present alone.
The most interesting variation to be noted in Table II is that of the PV with the valence type of the salt present. In the case of salts containing pairs of singly-charged ions - i.e., sodium chloride, potassium chloride and sodium bromide - the PV is constant for all. This holds also for those salts containing one singly charged ion and one double charged ion - i.e. sodium sulphate, calcium chloride and magnesium chloride - where the PV, though equal among the three, varies markedly from those of the first set. The PV is, therefore, apparently a function of the ionic strength of the solution.
This effect also exists in connection with the Plateau Height, though less regularly. In the case of singly charged ions, such as in the first three salts listed in Table II, the PH is fairly close to that of water itself. It falls considerably where doubly charged ions, such as sulphate or calcium, are present. And when the triply charged phosphate ion or ferric ion is present, the value sinks to merely a quarter of its value in water.



Table II



Solvent (Salt solutions inPlateau Height  Plateau Volume
0- 001 M concentration)  (PH) seconds  (PV) milliliters 


Water  -1.13 1.25
Sodium Chloride solution -1.13 1.37
Sodium Bromide Solution -1.10 1.37
Potassium Chloride solution  -1.08 1.37
Sodium Sulphate solution -0.721.59
Calcium Chloride solution -0.961.59 
Magnesium Chloride solution -0.85  1.59
Calcium Sulphate solution -0.611.72
Sodium Phosphate solution  -0.32 1.97
Ferric Chloride solution  -0.291.99 


Time of Solution and Mixtures of Ions - Experiments currently in progress in these laboratories are concerned with the extremely important question of the variation of these endo-chronic properties of thiotimoline in the presence of mixtures of ions. The state of our data at present does not warrant very general conclusions, but even our preliminary work gives hope of the further development of the endochronic methods of analysis. Thus, in Figure 4, we have the endochronic curve where a mixture of 0.001M Sodium Chloride and 0.001M Ferric Chloride solutions is the solvent. Here, two sharp changes in slope can be seen: the first at a solution time of -0.29, and the second at -1.13, these being the PH's characteristic of Fer ric Chloride and Sodium Chloride respectively - see Table II. The PH for a given salt would thus appear not to be affected by the presence of other salts.






Figure 4



This is definitely not the case, however, for the PV, and it is to a quantitative elucidation of the variation of PV with impurities in the solvent that our major efforts are now directed.
Summary - Investigations of the endochronic qualities of thiotimoline have shown that:
a - Careful purification of the material is necessary for obtaining quantitative results.
b - Increasing the volume of solvent results in increasing the negative time of solution to a constant value known as the Plateau Height (PH), at a volume of solvent known as the Plateau Volume (PV).
c - The value of the PH is characteristic of the nature of the ions present in the solvent, varying with the ionic strength of the solution and not varying with the addition of other ions.
d - The value of the PV is characteristic of the concentration of the ions present in the solvent, being constant for different ions in solution of equal ionic strength, but varying markedly with the admixtures of second varieties of ions.
As a result of all this, it is suggested that endochronic methods offer a means of rapid - 2 minutes or less - and accurate - within 0.1 % at least - analysis of inorganic, water-soluble materials.
Bibliography:
P. Krum and L. Eshkin. Journal of Chemical Solubilities, 27, 109-114 (1944), 'Concerning the Anomalous Solubility of Thiotimoline.'
E. J. Feinshreiber and Y. Hravlek. Journal of Chemical Solubilities, 22, 57-68 (1939), 'Solubility Speeds and Hydro-philic Groupings.'
P. Krum, I. Eshkin, and O. Nile. Annals of Synthetic Chemistry, 115, 1122-1145; 1208-1215 (1945), 'Structure of Thiotimoline, Parts I amp; II.'
G. H. Freudler, Journal of Psychochemistry, 2, 476-488 (1945), 'Initiative and Determination: Are They Influenced by Diet? - As tested by Thiotimoline solubility Experiments.'
E. Harley-Short, Philosophical Proceedings amp; Reviews, 15, 125-197 (1946), 'Determinism and Free-Will. The Application of Thiotimoline Solubility to Marxian Dialectic.'
P. Krum, 'Journal of Chemical Solubilities, 29, 818-819 (1946), 'A Device for the Quantitative Measurement of Thiotimoline Solubility Speed.'
A. Roundin, B. Lev, and Y. J. Prutt, Proceedings of the Society of Plant Chemistry, 80, 11-18 (1930), 'Natural Products isolated from shrubs of the genus Rosacea.'
Tiotimolin kak Ispitatel Marksciiskoy dilektiki B. Kreschia-tika, Journal Naouki i Sovetskoy Ticorii Vol. 11, No. 3.
Philossophia Neopredelennosti i Tiotimolin, Molvinski Pog-ost i Z. Brikalo. Mir i Kultura Vol. 2, No. 31.



***



When Campbell took the piece, I made one cautious stipulation. I knew it would appear in the spring and I knew that in the spring I would come up for my 'oral examinations' - the last hurdle on the path to my Ph.D. I didn't want any austere member of the examining board to decide I was making fun of chemical research and to be sufficiently offended to vote against me on the grounds that I wasn't temperamentally suited to the high honor of the doctorate. - So I asked Campbell to run it under a pseudonym.
When the magazine with the article finally reached the newsstands, in mid-February 1948, I was appalled to discover that Campbell had utterly forgotten the matter of the pseudonym. The article appeared under my own name and I was scheduled to have my orals within three months. My nervousness was increased when, almost at once, copies of the magazine began circulating in the chemistry department.
On May 20, 1948,1 had my orals. The examining board had seen the article. After I had been on the grill for an hour and twenty minutes, the last question (asked by Professor Ralph S. Halford) was, 'Mr. Asimov, tell us something about the thermo-dynamic properties of the compound thiotimoline.'
I broke into hysterical laughter put of sheer relief, for it struck me instantly that they wouldn't play good-natured jokes with me (Professor Halford sounded jovial and everyone else was smiling) if they were going to flunk me. I was led out, still laughing, and after a twenty-minute wait, the examiners emerged, shook my hand, and said, 'Congratulations, Dr. Asimov.'
My fellow students insisted on forcing five Manhattans down my throat that afternoon and, since I am a teetotaler under normal conditions and have no tolerance for alcohol, I was royally drunk at once. It took them three hours to sober me up.
After the official ceremonies, on June 1, 1948, I was Isaac Asimov, Ph.D.
As it turned out, Campbell 's non-use of a pseudonym (and I bet he did it deliberately, because he was smarter than I was) was a lucky break indeed. Not only did the examining board not take it amiss, but the article became, in a minor way, famous, and I with it.
Although 'Thiotimoline' appeared in Astounding, as did all my stories of the time, it received circulation far outside the ordinary science fiction world. It passed from chemist to chemist, by way of the magazine itself, or by reprints in small trade journals, or by copies pirated and mimeographed, even by word of mouth. People who had never heard of me at all as a science fiction writer, heard of thiotimoline. It was the very first time my fame transcended the field.
What's more, although 'Thiotimoline' was essentially a work of fantasy, the form was that of non-fiction. Viewed from that standpoint, 'Thiotimoline was the first piece of non-fiction I had ever published professionally - the harbinger of a vast amount to come.
But what amused me most was that a surprising number of readers actually took the article seriously. I was told that in the weeks after its appearance the librarians at the New York Public Library were driven out of their minds by hordes of eager youngsters who demanded to see copies of the fake journals I had used as pseudo references.
But back to the summer of 1947 -
Over a period of five years I had sold fourteen stories, every one of them to Campbell. This didn't mean that he was the only editor in the field, at all. Almost all the magazines that had been published before the war still existed (although only Astounding was really doing well) and would have welcomed submissions from me. Had Campbell rejected any of the stories I had submitted to him, I would certainly have tried one of those other magazines. - But he didn't, so I didn't.
The magazine Startling Stories, in which I had published 'Christmas on Ganymede' five and a half years before, published a forty-thousand word 'short novel' in each issue. It wasn't easy to get a publishable story of that length every month though, especially since Startling's rate was only half that of Astounding.
Sometimes it was necessary, therefore, for the editor of the magazine, who at that time was Sam Merwin, Jr., to canvass those authors known to be capable of turning out such a story. About the time I was doing 'Thiotimoline,' Merwin approached me with a suggestion that I write a lead short novel.
Startling, he explained, had always published stories with the accent on adventure, but, in imitation of Astounding's success, he had persuaded the publisher to try the experiment of publisting stories with a heavier accent on science. Would I consider, then, doing a lead for Startling?

I was terribly flattered. Also, as I said earlier, I was nervous about having become a one-editor author and would have welcomed a chance to prove to myself that I could write beyond Campbell 's protective shadow. I agreed, therefore, and a good part of the summer of 1947 (when I wasn't engaged in preparing my experimental data for the upcoming Ph.D. dissertation) was spent in preparing a story I called 'Grow Old with Me.'

[7]
By August 3 I had completed first draft. On August 26, I had the first part of it in final copy and submitted that to Merwin. He approved. On September 23 the entire story was submitted and I had no doubt, whatever, of its acceptance. On October 15, 1947, however, Merwin told me that, alas, Startling had decided not to go for heavy science, after all, but for adventure, and that 'Grow Old with Me' would have to be completely rewritten with no guarantee of acceptance after that.
I suppose it is an indication of how things had advanced when I tell you it was the first time that I did not accept a request for revision philosophically. Quite otherwise! It had been five years and more since even Campbell had rejected one of my stories; how, then, dare a comparative nonentity like Merwin do so? Particularly since he had approached me for the story?

I made no effort to hide my annoyance. In fact, I seized the manuscript and stalked out of the office, and in an obvious rage

[8] I submitted the story to Campbell, giving him a full account of events. - I have always made it a practice to tell any editor to whom I submit a story of any rejection it has previously received. There is no necessity to do this; it is not, as far as I know, an ethical requirement for a writer. I just do it, and it has not, again as far as I know, ever cost me an acceptance.
As it happened, Campbell rejected the story, but not, I'm sure, because it had been somewhere else first. He told me enough things wrong with the story to make me feel that perhaps Merwin had not been so arbitrary in rejecting it. I thrust the story in the drawer in disgust and thought no more about it for nearly two years.
The rejection came at a bad time. More and more, I was wrapped up in trying to complete my research, in writing my dissertation, and, most of all, in anxiously looking for a job. There wasn't much time to write, and the rejection had sufficiently disheartened and humiliated me so that I withdrew from writing for nearly a year. This was the third long withdrawal of my writing career, and, to this date, the last.
I did not find a job; my expected Ph.D. degree was no passport to affluence, after all. That was humiliating, too.
I accepted an offer from Professor Robert C. Elderfield to do a year's postdoctoral research for him for $4,500, working on anti-malarial drugs, I accepted, though not with great enthusiasm, and started work for him on June 2, 1948, the day after I had officially gained my Ph.D. - At least it would give me another year to find a job.
By the next month, I had settled down sufficiently to consider writing a science fiction story, 'The Red Queen's Race.' On July 12 it was finished and I submitted it to Campbell. It was accepted on the sixteenth and once again I was back in business.






The Red Queen's Race [9]


Here's a puzzle for you, if you like. Is it a crime to translate a chemistry textbook into Greek?
Or let's put it another way. If one of the country's largest atomic power plants is completely ruined in an unauthorized experiment, is an admitted accessory to that act a criminal?
These problems only developed with time, of course. We started with the atomic power plant - drained. I really mean drained. I don't know exactly how large the fissionable power source was - but in two flashing microseconds, it had all fissioned.
No explosion. No undue gamma ray density. It was merely that every moving part in the entire structure was fused. The entire main building was mildly hot. Just a dead, useless building which later on took a hundred million dollars to replace.
It happened about three in the morning, and they found Elmer Tywood alone in the central source chamber. The findings of twenty-four close-packed hours can be summarized quickly.
1. Elmer Tywood - Ph.D., Sc.D., Fellow of This and Hon orary That, one-time youthful participant of the original Man hattan Project, and now full Professor of Nuclear Physics - was no interloper. He had a Class-A Pass - Unlimited. But no record could be found as to his purpose in being there just then. A table on casters contained equipment which had not been made on any recorded requisition. It, too, was a single fused mass - not quite too hot to touch.
2. Elmer Tywood was dead. He lay next to the table; his face congested, nearly black. No radiation effect. No external force of any sort. The doctor said apoplexy.
3. In Elmer Tywood's office safe were found two puzzling Items: i.e. twenty foolscap sheets of apparent mathematics, and a bound folio in a foreign language which turned out to be Greek, the subject matter, on translation, turning out to be chemistry.
The secrecy which poured over the whole mess was something so terrific as to make everything that touched it, dead. It's the only word that can describe it. Twenty-seven men and women, all told, including the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of Science and two or three others so top-notch that they were completely unknown to the public, entered the power plant during the period of investigation. All who had been in the plant that night, the physicist who had identified Tywood, the doctor who had examined him, were retired into virtual home arrest.
No newspaper ever got the story. No inside dopester got it. A few members of Congress got part of it.
And naturally so! Anyone or any group or any country that could suck all the available energy out of the equivalent of perhaps fifty to a hundred pounds of plutonium without exploding it, had America's industry and America's defense so snugly in the palm of the hand that the light and life of one hundred sixty million people could be turned off between yawns.
Was it Tywood? Or Tywood and others? Or just others, through Tywood?
And my job? I was decoy; or front man, if you like. Someone has to hang around the university and ask questions about Tywood. After all, he was missing. It could be amnesia, a holdup, a kidnapping, a killing, a runaway, insanity, accident - I could busy myself with that for five years and collect black looks, and maybe divert attention. To be sure, it didn't work out that way.
But don't think I was in on the whole case at the start. I wasn't one of the twenty-seven men I mentioned a while back, though my boss was. But I knew a little - enough to get started.
Professor John Keyser was also in Physics. I didn't get to him right away. There was a good deal of routine to cover first in as conscientious a way as I could. Quite meaningless. Quite necessary. But I was in Keyser's office now.
Professors' offices are distinctive. Nobody dusts them except some tired cleaning woman who hobbles in and out at eight in the morning, and the professor never notices the dust anyway. Lots of books without much arrangement. The ones close to the desk are used a lot - lectures are copied out of them. The ones out of reach are wherever a student put them back after borrowing them. Then there are professional journals that look cheap and are darned expensive, which are waiting about and which may some day be read. And plenty of paper on the desk; some of it scribbled on.
Keyser was an elderly man - one of Tywood's generation. His nose was big and rather red, and he smoked a pipe. He had that easy-going and nonpredatory look in his eyes that goes with an academic job - either because that kind of job attracts that kind of man or because that kind of job makes that kind of man.
I said: 'What kind of work is Professor Tywood doing?'
'Research physics.'
Answers like that bounce off me. Some years ago they used to get me mad. Now I just said: 'We know that, professor. It's the details I'm after.'
And he twinkled at me tolerantly: 'Surely the details can't help much unless you're a research physicist yourself. Does it matter - under the circumstances?'
'Maybe not. But he's gone. If anything's happened to him in the way of - I gestured, and deliberately clinched - 'foul play, his work may have something to do with it - unless he's rich and the motive is money.'
Keyser chuckled dryly: 'College professors are never rich. The commodity we peddle is but lightly considered, seeing how large the supply is.'
I ignored that, too, because I know my looks are against me. Actually, I finished college with a 'very good' translated into Latin so that the college president could understand it, and never played in a football game in my life. But I look rather the reverse.
I said: 'Then we're left with his work to consider.'
'You mean spies? International intrigue?'
'Why not? It's happened before! After all, he's a nuclear physicist, isn't he?'
'He is. But so are others. So am I.'
'Ah, but perhaps he knows something you don't.'
There was a stiffening to the jaw. When caught off-guard, professors can act just like people. He said, stiffly: 'As I recall offhand, Tywood has published papers on the effect of liquid viscosity on the wings of the Rayleigh line, on higher-orbit field equations, and on spin-orbit coupling of two nucleons, but his main work is on quadrupole moments. I am quite competent in these matters.'
'Is he working on quadrupole moments now?' I tried not to bat an eye, and I think I succeeded.
'Yes - in a way.' He almost sneered, 'He may be getting to the experimental stage finally. He's spent most of his life, 'it seems, working out the mathematical consequences of a special theory of his own.'
'Like this,' and I tossed a sheet of foolscap at him.
The sheet was one of those in the safe in Tywood's office. The chances, of course, were that the bundle meant nothing, if only because it was a professor's safe. That is, things are sometimes put in at the spur of the moment because the logical drawer was filled with unmarked exam papers. And of course, nothing is ever taken out. We had found in that safe dusty little vials of yellowish crystals with scarcely legible labels, some mimeographed booklets dating back to World War II and marked 'Restricted,' a copy of an old college yearbook, and some correspondence concerning a possible position as Director of Research for American Electric, dated ten years back, and, of course, chemistry in Greek.
The foolscap was there, too. It was rolled up like a college diploma with a rubber band about it and had no label or descriptive title. Some twenty sheets were covered with ink marks, meticulous and small -
I had one sheet of that foolscap. I don't think any one man in the world had more than one sheet. And I'm sure that no man in the world but one knew that the loss of his particular sheet and of his particular life would be as nearly simultaneous as the government could make it.
So I tossed the sheet at Keyser, as if it were something I'd found blowing about the campus.
He stared at it and then looked at the back side, which was blank. His eyes moved down from the top to the bottom, then jumped back to the top.
'I don't know what this is about,' he said, and the words seemed sour to his own taste.
I didn't say anything. Just folded the paper and shoved it back into the inside jacket pocket.
Keyser added petulantly: 'It's a fallacy you laymen have that scientists can look at an equation and say, "Ah, yes-" and go on to write a book about it. Mathematics has no existence of its own. It is merely an arbitrary code devised to describe physical observations or philosophical concepts. Every man can adapt it is to his own particular needs. For instance no one can look at a symbol and be sure of what it means. So far, science has used every letter in the alphabet, large, small and italic, each symbolizing many different things. They have used bold-faced letters, Gothic-type letters, Greek letters, both capital and small, subscripts, superscripts, asterisks, even Hebrew letters. Different scientists use different symbols for the same concept and the same symbol for different concepts. So if you show a disconnected page like this to any man, without information as to the subject being investigated or the particular symbology used, he could absolutely not make sense out of it.'
I interrupted: 'But you said he was working on quadrupole moments. Does that make this sensible?' and I tapped the spot on my chest where the foolscap had been slowly scorching a hole in my jacket for two days.
'I can't tell. I saw none of the standard relationships that I'd expect to be involved. At least I recognized none. But I obviously can't commit myself.'
There was a short silence, then he said: Til tell you. Why don't you check with his students?'
I lifted my eyebrows: 'You mean in his classes?'
He seemed annoyed: 'No, for Heaven's sake. His research students! His doctoral candidates! They've been working with him. They'll know the details of that work better than I, or anyone in the faculty, could possibly know it.'
'It's an idea,' I said, casually. It was, too. I don't know why, but I wouldn't have thought of it myself. I guess it's because it's only natural to think that any professor knows more than any student.
Keyser latched onto a lapel as I rose to leave. 'And, besides,' he said, 'I think you're on the wrong track. This is in confidence, you understand, and I wouldn't say it except for the unusual circumstances, but Tywood is not thought of too highly in the profession. Oh, he's an adequate teacher, I'll admit, but his research papers have never commanded respect. There has always been a tendency toward vague theorizing, unsupported by experimental evidence. That paper of yours is probably more of it. No one could possibly want toÖ er kidnap him because of it.'
'Is that so? I see. Any ideas, yourself, as to why he's gone, or where he's gone?'
'Nothing concrete,' he said pursing his lips, 'but everyone knows he is a sick man. He had a stroke two years ago that kept him out of classes for a semester. He never did get well. His left side was paralyzed for a while and he still limps. Another stroke would kill him. It could come any time.'
'You think he's dead, then?'
'It's not impossible.'
'But Where's the body, then?'
'Well, really - That is your job, I think.'
It was, and I left.
I interviewed each one of Tywood's four research students in a volume of chaos called a research laboratory. These student research laboratories usually have two hopefuls working therein, said two constituting a floating population, since every year or so they are alternately replaced.
Consequently, the laboratory has its equipment stack in tiers. On the laboratory benches is the equipment immediately being used, and in three or four of the handiest drawers are replacements or supplements which are likely to be used. In the farther drawers, on the shelves reaching up to the ceiling, in odd corners, are fading remnants of the past student generations - oddments never used and never discarded. It is claimed, in fact, that no research student ever knew all the contents of his laboratory.
All four of Tywood's students were worried. But three were worried mainly by their own status. That is, by the possible effect the absence of Tywood might have on the status of their 'problem.' I dismissed those three - who all have their degrees now, I hope - and called back the fourth.
He had the most haggard look of all, and had been least communicative - which I considered a hopeful sign.
He now sat stiffly in the straight-backed chair at the right of the desk, while I leaned back in a creaky old swivel-chair and pushed my hat off my forehead. His name was Edwin Howe and he did get his degree later on; I know that for sure, because he's a big wheel in the Department of Science now.
I said: 'You do the same work the other boys do, I suppose?'
'It's all nuclear work, in a way.'
'But it's not all exactly the same?'
He shook his head slowly. 'We take different angles. You have to have something clear-cut, you know, or you won't be able to publish. We've got to get our degrees.'
He said it exactly the way you or I might say, 'We've got to make a living." At that, maybe it's the same thing for them.
I said: 'All right. What's your angle?'
He said: 'I do the math. I mean, with Professor Tywood.'
'What kind of math?'
And he smiled a little, getting the same sort of atmosphere about him that I had noticed in Professor Keyset's case that morning. A sort of, 'Do-you-really-think-I-can-explain-all-my-profound-thoughts-to-stupid-little-you?' sort of atmosphere.
All he said aloud, however, was: 'That would be rather complicated to explain.'
'I'll help you,' I said. 'Is that anything like it?' And I tossed the foolscap sheet at him.
He didn't give it any once-over. He just snatched it up and let out a thin wail: 'Where'd you get this?'
'From Tywood's safe.'
'Do you have the rest of it, too?'
'It's safe,' I hedged.
He relaxed a little - just a little: 'You didn't show it to anybody, did you?'
I showed it to Professor Keyser.'
Howe made an impolite sound with his lower lip and front teeth, 'That jackass. What did he say?'
I turned the palms of my hands upward and Howe laughed. Then he said, in an offhand manner: 'Well, that's the sort of stuff I do.'
'And what's it all about? Put it so I can understand it.'
There was distinct hesitation. He said: 'Now, look. This is confidential stuff. Even Pop's other students don't know anything about it. I don't even think I know all about it. This isn't just a degree I'm after, you know. It's Pop Tywood's Nobel Prize, and it's going to be an Assistant Professorship for me at Cal Tech. This has got to be published before it's talked about.'
And I shook my head slowly and made my words very soft: 'No, son. You have it twisted. You'll have to talk about it before it's published, because Tywood's gone and maybe he's dead and maybe he isn't. And if he's dead, maybe he's murdered. And when the department has a suspicion of murder, everybody talks. Now, it will look bad for you, kid, if you try to keep some secrets.'
It worked. I knew it would, because everyone reads murder mysteries and knows all the cliches. He jumped out of his chair and rattled the words off as if he had a script in front of him.
'Surely,' he said, 'you can't suspect me ofÖ of anything like that. WhyÖ why, my career -'
I shoved him back into his chair with the beginnings of a sweat on his forehead. I went into the next line: 'I don't suspect anybody of anything yet. And you won't be in any trouble, if you talk, chum.'
He was ready to talk. 'Now this is all in strict confidence.'
Poor guy. He didn't know the meaning of the word 'strict' He was never out of eyeshot of an operator from that moment till the government decided to bury the whole case with the one final comment of '?' Quote. Unquote. (I'm not kidding. To this day, the case is neither opened nor closed. It's just '?')
He said, dubiously; 'You know what time travel is, I suppose?'
Sure I knew what time travel was. My oldest kid is twelve and he listens to the afternoon video programs till he swells up visibly with the junk he absorbs at the ears and eyes.
'What about time travel?' I said.
'In a sense, we can do it. Actually, it's only what you might call micro-temporal-translation -'
I almost lost my temper. In fact, I think I did. It seemed obvious that the squirt was trying to diddle me; and without subtlety. I'm used to having people think I look dumb; but not that dumb.
I said through the back of my throat: 'Are you going to tell me that Tywood is out somewhere in time - like Ace Rogers, the Lone Time Ranger?' (That was Junior's favorite program Ace Rogers was stopping Genghis Khan single-handed that week.)
But he looked as disgusted as I mast have. 'No,' he yelled. 'I don't know where Pop is. If you'd listen to me - I said micro-temporal-translation. Now, this isn't a video show and it isn't magic; this happens to be science. For instance, you know about matter-energy equivalence, I suppose.'
I nodded sourly. Everyone knows about that since Hiroshima in the last war but one.
'All right, then,' he went on, 'that's good for a start. Now, if you take a known mass of matter and apply temporal translation to it - you know, send it back in time - you are, in effect, creating matter at the point in time to which you are sending it. To do that, you must use an amount of energy equivalent to the amount of matter you have created. In other words, to send a gram - or, say, an ounce - of anything back in time, you have to disintegrate an ounce of matter completely, to furnish the energy required.'
'Hm-m-m,' I said, 'that's to create the ounce of matter in the past. But aren't you destroying an ounce of matter by removing it from the present? Doesn't that create the equivalent amount of energy?'
And he looked just about as annoyed as a fellow sitting on a bumblebee that wasn't quite dead. Apparently laymen are never supposed to question scientists.
He said: 'I was trying to simplify it so you would understand it. Actually, it's more complicated. It would be very nice if we could use the energy of disappearance to cause it to appear, but that would be working in a circle, believe me. The requirements of entropy would forbid it. To put it more rigorously, the energy is required to overcome temporal inertia and it just works out so that the energy in ergs required to send back a mass, in grams, is equal to the mass times the square of the speed of light in centimeters per second. Which just happens to be the Einstein Mass-Energy Equivalence Equation. I can give you the mathematics, you know.'
'I know,' I waxed some of that misplaced eagerness back. 'But was all this worked out experimentally? Or is it just on paper?'
Obviously, the thing was to keep him talking.
He had that queer light in his eye that every research student gets, I am told, when he is asked to discuss his problem. He'll discuss it with anyone, even with a 'dumb flatfoot' -which was convenient at the moment.
'You see,' he said like a man slipping you the inside dope on a shady business deal, 'what started the whole thing was this neutrino business. They've been trying to find that neutrino since the late thirties and they haven't succeeded. It's a subatomic particle which has no charge and has a mass much less than even an electron. Naturally, it's next to impossible to spot, and hasn't been spotted yet. But they keep looking because, without assuming that a neutrino exists, the energetics of some nuclear reactions can't be balanced. So Pop Tywood got the idea about twenty years ago that some energy was disappearing, in the form of matter, back into time. We got working on that - or he did - and I'm the first student he's ever had tackle it along with him.
'Obviously, we had to work with tiny amounts of material andÖ well, it was just a stroke of genius on Pop's part to think of using traces of artificial radioactive isotopes. You could work with just a few micrograms of it, you know, by following its activity with counters. The variation of activity with time should follow a very definite and simple law which, has never been altered by any laboratory condition known.
'Well, we'd send a speck back fifteen minutes, say, and fifteen minutes before we did that - everything was arranged automatically, you see - the count jumped to nearly double what it should be, fell off normally, and then dropped sharply at the moment it was sent back below where it would have been normally. The material overlapped itself in time, you see, and for fifteen minutes we counted the double material -'
I interrupted: 'You mean you had the same atoms existing in two places at the same time.'
'Yes,' he said, with mild surprise, 'why not? That's why we use so much energy - the equivalent of creating those atoms.' And then he rushed on, 'Now I'll tell you what my particular job is. If you send back the material fifteen minutes, it is apparently sent back to the same spot relative to the Earth despite the fact that in fifteen minutes, the Earth moved sixteen thousand miles around the Sun, and the Sun itself moves more thousand miles and so on. But there are certain tiny discrepancies which I've analyzed and which turn out to be due, possibly, to two causes.
'First, there is a factional effect - if you can use such a term - so the matter does drift a little with respect to the Earth, depending on how far back in time it is sent, and on the nature of material. Then, too, some of the discrepancy can only be explained by the assumption that passage through time itself takes time.'
'How's that?' I said.
'What I mean is that some of the radioactivity is evenly spread throughout the time of translation as if the material tested had been reacting during backward passage through time by a constant amount. My figures show that - well, if you were to be moved backward in time, you would age one day for every hundred years. Or, to put it another way, if you could watch a time dial which recorded the time outside a "time-machine," your watch would move forward twenty-four hours while the time dial moved back a hundred years. That's a universal constant, I think, because the speed of light is a universal constant. Anyway, that's my work.'
After a few minutes, in which I chewed all this, I asked: 'Where did you get the energy needed for your experiments?'
'They ran out a special line from the power plant. Pop's a big shot there, and swung the deal.'
'Hm-m-m. What was the heaviest amount of material you sent into the past?'
'Oh' - he sent his eyes upwards - 'I think we shot back one hundredth of a milligram once. That's ten micrograms.'
'Ever try sending anything into the future?'
That won't work,' he put in quickly. 'Impossible. You can't change signs like that, because the energy required becomes more than infinite. It's a one-way proposition.'
I looked hard at my fingernails: 'How much material could you send back in time if you fissioned aboutÖ oh, say, one hundred pounds of plutonium.' Things, I thought, were becoming, if anything, too obvious.
The answer came quickly: 'In plutonium fission,' he said, 'not more than one or two percent of the mass is converted into energy. Therefore, one hundred pounds of plutonium when completely used up would send a pound or two back into time.'
'Is that all? But could you handle all that energy? I mean, a hundred pounds of plutonium can make quite an explosion.'
'All relative,' he said, a bit pompously. 'If you took all that energy and let it loose a little at a time, you could handle it. If you released it all at once, but used it just as fast as you released it, you could still handle it. In sending back material through time, energy can be used much faster than it can possibly be released even through fission. Theoretically, anyway.'
'But how do you get rid of it?'
'It's spread through time, naturally. Of course, the minimum time through which material could be transferred would, therefore, depend on the mass of the material. Otherwise, you're liable to have the energy density with time too high.'
'All right, kid,' I said. 'I'm calling up headquarters, and they'll send a man here to take you home. You'll stay there a while.'
'But - What for?'
'It won't be for long.'
It wasn't - and it was made up to him afterwards.
I spent the evening at Headquarters. We had a library there - a very special kind of library. The very morning after the explosion, two or three operators had drifted quietly into the chemistry and physics libraries of the University. Experts in their way. They located every article Tywood had ever published in any scientific journal and had snapped each page. Nothing was disturbed otherwise.
Other men went through magazine files and through book lists. It ended with a room at Headquarters that represented a complete Tywoodana. Nor was there a definite purpose in doing this. It merely represented part of the thoroughness with which a problem of this sort is met.
I went through that library. Not the scientific papers. I knew there'd be nothing there that I wanted. But he had written a series of articles for a magazine twenty years back, and I read those. And I grabbed at every piece of private correspondence they had available.
After that, I just sat and thought - and got scared.
I got to bed about four in the morning and had nightmares.
But I was in the Boss' private office at nine in the morning just the same.
He's a big man, the Boss, with iron-gray hair slicked down tight. He doesn't smoke, but he keeps a box of cigars on his desk and when he doesn't want to say anything for a few seconds, he picks one up, rolls it about a little, smells it, then sticks it right into the middle of his mouth and lights it in a very careful way. By that time, he either has something to say or doesn't have to say anything at all. Then he puts the cigar down and lets it burn to death.
He used up a box in about three weeks, and every Christmas, half his gift-wraps held boxes of cigars.
He wasn't reaching for any cigars now, though. He just folded his big fists together on the desk and looked up at me from under a creased forehead. 'What's boiling?'
I told him. Slowly, because micro-temporal-translation doesn't sit well with anybody, especially when you call it time travel, which I did. It's a sign of how serious things were that he only asked me once if I were crazy.
Then I was finished and we stared at each other.
He said: 'And you think he tried to send something back in time - something weighing a pound or two - and blew an entire plant doing it?'
'It fits in,' I said.
I let him go for a while. He was thinking and I wanted him to keep on thinking. I wanted him, if possible, to think of the same thing I was thinking, so that I wouldn't have to tell him -
Because I hated to have to tell him -
Because it was nuts, for one thing. And too horrible, for another.
So I kept quiet and he kept on thinking and every once in a while some of his thoughts came to the surface.
After a while, he said: 'Assuming the student, Howe, to have told the truth - and you'd better check his notebooks, by the way, which I hope you've impounded -'
'The entire wing of that floor is out of bounds, sir. Edwards has the notebooks.'
He went on: 'All right. Assuming he told us all the truth he knows, why did Tywood jump from less than a milligram to a pound?'
His eyes came down and they were hard: 'Now you're concentrating on the time-travel angle. To you, I gather, that is the crucial point, with the energy involved as incidental -purely incidental.'
'Yes, sir,' I said grimly. 'I think exactly that.'
'Have you considered that you might be wrong? That you might have matters inverted?'
'I don't quite get that.'
'Well, look. You say you've read up on Tywood. All right. He was one of that bunch of scientists after World War II that fought the atom bomb; wanted a world state - You know about that, don't you?'
I nodded.
'He had a guilt complex,' the Boss said with energy. 'He'd helped work out the bomb, and he couldn't sleep nights thinking of what he'd done. He lived with that fear for years. And even though the bomb wasn't used in World War III, can you imagine what every day of uncertainty must have meant to him? Can you imagine the shriveling horror in his soul as he waited for others to make the decision at every crucial moment till the final Compromise of Sixty-Five?
'We have a complete psychiatric analysis of Tywood and several others just like him, taken during the last war. Did you know that?'
'No, sir.'
'It's true. We let up after Sixty-Five, of course, because with the establishment of world control of atomic power, the scrapping of the atomic bomb stockpile in all countries, and the establishment of research liaison among the various spheres of influence on the planet, most of the ethical conflict in the scientific mind was removed.
'But the findings at the time were serious. In 1964, Tywood had a morbid subconscious hatred for the very concept of atomic power. He began to make mistakes, serious ones. Eventually, we were forced to take him off research of any kind. And several others as well, even though things were pretty bad at the time. We had just lost India, if you remember.'
Considering that I was in India at the time, I remembered. But I still wasn't seeing his point.
'Now, what,' he continued, 'if dregs of that attitude remained buried in Tywood to the very end? Don't you see that this time-travel is a double-edged sword? Why throw a pound of anything into the past, anyway? For the sake of proving a point? He had proved his case just as much when he sent back a fraction of a milligram. That was good enough for the Nobel Prize, I suppose.
'But there was one thing he could do with a pound of matter that he couldn't do with a milligram, and that was to drain a power plant. So that was what he must have been after. He had discovered a way of consuming inconceivable quantities of energy. By sending back eighty pounds of dirt, he could remove all the existing plutonium in the world. End atomic power for an indefinite period.'
I was completely unimpressed, but I tried not to make that too -plain. I just said: 'Do you think he could possibly have thought he could get away with it more than once?'
'This is all based on the fact that he wasn't a normal man. How do I know what he could imagine he could do? Besides, there may be men behind him - with less science and more brains - who are quite ready to continue onwards from this point.'
'Have any of these men been found yet? Any evidence of such men?'
A little wait, and his hand reached for the cigar box. He stared at the cigar and turned it end for end. Just a little wait more. I was patient.
Then he put it down decisively without lighting it.
'No,' he said.
He looked at me, and clear through me and said: 'Then, you still don't go for that?'
I shrugged, 'Well - It doesn't sound right.'
'Do you have a notion of your own?'
'Yes. But I can't bring myself to talk about it. If I'm wrong, I'm the wrongest man that ever was; but if I'm right, I'm the rightest.'
'I'll listen,' he said, and he put his hand under the desk.
That was the pay-off. The room was armored, sound-proof, and radiation-proof to anything short of a nuclear explosion. And with that little signal showing on his secretary's desk, the President of the United States couldn't have interrupted us.
I leaned back and said: 'Chief, do you happen to remember how you met your wife? Was it a little thing?'
He must have thought it a non sequitur. What else could he have thought? But he was giving me my head now; having his own reasons, I suppose.
He just smiled and said: 'I sneezed and she turned around. It was at a street corner.'
'What made you be on that street corner just then? What made her be? Do you remember just why you sneezed? Where you caught the cold? Or where the speck of dust came from? Imagine how many factors had to intersect in just the right place at just the right time for you to meet your wife,'
'I suppose we would have met some other time, if not then?'
'But you can't know that. How do you know whom you didn't meet, because once when you might have turned around, you didn't; because once when you might have been late, you weren't. Your life forks at every instant, and you go down one of the forks almost at random, and so does everyone else. Start twenty years ago, and the forks diverge further and further with time.
'You sneezed, and met a girl, and not another. As a consequence, you made certain decisions, and so did the girl, and so did the girl you didn't meet, and the man who did meet her, and the people you all met thereafter. And your family, her family, their family - and your children.
'Because you sneezed twenty years ago, five people, or fifty, or five hundred, might be dead now who would have been alive, or might be alive who would have been dead. Move it to two hundred years ago: two thousand years ago, and a sneeze - even by someone no history ever heard of - might have meant that no one now alive would have been alive.'
The Boss rubbed the back of his head: 'Widening ripples. I read a story once -'
'So did I. It's not a new idea - but I want you to think about it for a while, because I want to read to you from an article by Professor Elmer Tywood in a magazine twenty years old. It was just before the last war.'
I had copies of the film in my pocket and the white wall made a beautiful screen, which was what it was meant to do. The boss made a motion to turn about, but I waved him back.
'No, sir,' I said. 'I want to read this to you. And I want you to listen to it.'
He leaned back.
'The article,' I went on, is entitled: "Man's First Great Failure!" Remember, this was just before the war, when the bitter disappointment at the final failure of the United Nations was at its height. What I will read are some excerpts from the first part of the article. It goes like this:
'"Ö That Man, with his technical perfection, has failed to solve the great sociological problems of today is only the second immense tragedy that has come to the race. The first, and perhaps the greater, was that, once, these same great sociological problems -were solved; and yet these solutions were not permanent, because the technical perfection we have today did not then exist.
'"It was a case of having bread without butter, or butter without bread. Never both togetherÖ
' "Consider the Hellenic world, from which our philosophy, our mathematics, our ethics, our art, our literature - our entire culture, in fact - stemÖ In the days of Pericles, Greece, like our own world in microcosm, was a surprisingly modern pot pourri of conflicting ideologies and ways of life. But then Rome came, adopting the culture, but bestowing, and enforc ing, peace. To be sure, the Pax Romano lasted only two hun dred years, but no like period has existed sinceÖ
' "War was abolished. Nationalism did not exist. The Roman citizen was Empire-wide. Paul of Tarsus and Flavius Josephus were Roman citizens. Spaniards, North Africans, Illyrians assumed the purple. Slavery existed, but it was an indiscriminate slavery, imposed as a punishment, incurred as the price of economic failure, brought on by the fortunes of war. No man was a natural slave - because of the color of his skin or the place of his birth.
'"Religious toleration was complete. If an exception was made early in the case of the Christians, it was because they refused to accept the principle of toleration; because they in sisted that only they themselves knew truth - a principle ab horrent to the civilized RomanÖ
' "With all of Western culture under a single polis, with the cancer of religious and national particularism and exclusiv-ism absent; with a high civilization in existence - why could not Man hold his gains?
' "It was because, technologically, ancient Hellenism remained backward. It was because without a machine civilization, the price of leisure - and hence civilization and culture -for the few, was slavery for the many. Because the civilization could not find the means to bring comfort and ease to all the population.
' "Therefore, the depressed classes turned to the other world, and to religions which spurned the material benefits of this world - so that science was made impossible in any true sense for over a millennium. And further, as the initial impetus of Hellenism waned, the Empire lacked the technological powers to beat back the barbarians. In fact, it was not till after a.d. 1500 that war became sufficiently a function of the industrial resources of a nation to enable the settled people to defeat invading tribesmen and nomads with easeÖ
'"Imagine, then, if somehow the ancient Greeks had learned just a hint of modern chemistry and physics. Imagine if the growth of the Empire had been accompanied by the growth of science, technology and industry. Imagine an Empire in which machinery replaced slaves, in which all men had a decent share of the world's goods, in which the legion became the armored column against which no barbarians could stand. Imagine an Empire which would therefore spread all over the world, without religious or national prejudices.
'"An Empire of all men - all brothers - eventually all freeÖ
' "If history could be changed. If that first great failure could have been prevented -"'
And I stopped at that point.
'Well?'said the Boss.
'Well,' I said, 'I think it isn't difficult to connect all that with the fact that Tywood blew an entire power plant in his anxiety to send something back to the past, while in his office safe we found sections of a chemistry textbook translated into Greek.'
His face changed, while he considered.
Then he said heavily: 'But nothing's happened.'
'I know. But then I've been told by Tywood's student that it takes a day to move back a century in time. Assuming that ancient Greece was the target area, we have twenty centuries, hence twenty days.'
'But can it be stopped?'
'I wouldn't know. Tywood might, but he's dead.'
The enormity of it all hit me at once, deeper than it had the night before -
All humanity was virtually under sentence of death. And while that was merely horrible abstraction, the fact that reduced it to a thoroughly unbearable reality was that I was, too. And my wife, and my kid.
Further, it was a death without precedence. A ceasing to exist, and no more. The passing of a breath. The vanishing of a dream. The drift into eternal non-space and non-time of a shadow. I would not be dead at all, in fact. I would merely never have been born.
Or would I? Would I exist - my individuality - my ego - my soul, if you like? Another life? Other circumstances?
I thought none of that in words then. But if a cold knot in the stomach could ever speak under the circumstances, it would sound like that, I think.
The Boss moved in on my thoughts - hard.
'Then, we have about two and a half weeks. No time to lose. Come on.'
I grinned with one side of my mouth: 'What do we do? Chase the book?'
'No,' he replied coldly, 'but there are two courses of action we must follow. First, you may be wrong - altogether. All of this circumstantial reasoning may still represent a false lead, perhaps deliberately thrown before us, to cover up the real truth. That must be checked.
'Secondly, you may be right - but there may be some way of stopping the book: other than chasing it in a time machine, I mean. If so, we must find out how.'
'I would just like to say, sir, if this is a false lead, only a madman would consider it a believable one. So suppose I'm right, and suppose there's no way of stopping it?'
'Then, young fellow, I'm going to keep pretty busy for two and a half weeks, and I'd advise you to do the same. The time will pass more quickly that way.'
Of course he was right.
'Where do we start?' I asked.
'The first thing we need is a list of all men and women on the government payroll under Tywood.'
'Why?'
'Reasoning. Your specialty, you know. Tywood doesn't know Greek, I think we can assume with fair safety, so someone else must have done the translating. It isn't likely that anyone would do a job like that for nothing, and it isn't likely that Tywood would pay out of his personal funds - not on a professor's salary.'
'He might,' I pointed out, 'have been interested in more secrecy than a government payroll affords.'
'Why? Where was the danger? Is it a crime to translate a chemistry textbook into Greek? Who would ever deduce from that a plot such as you've described?'
It took us half an hour to turn up the name of Mycroft James Boulder, listed as 'Consultant,' and to find out that he was mentioned in the University Catalogue as Assistant Professor of Philosophy and to check by telephone that among his many accomplishments was a thorough knowledge of Attic Greek.
Which was a coincidence - because with the Boss reaching for his hat, the interoffice teletype clicked away and it turned out that Mycroft James Boulder was in the anteroom, at the end of a two-hour continuing insistence that he see the Boss.
The Boss put his hat back and opened his office door.
Professor Mycroft James Boulder was a gray man. His hair was gray and his eyes were gray. His suit was gray, too.
But most of all, his expression was gray; gray with a tension that seemed to twist at the lines in his thin face.
Boulder said, softly: 'I've been trying for three days to get a hearing, sir, with a responsible man. I can get no higher than yourself.'
'I may be high enough,' said the Boss. 'What's on your mind?'
'It is quite important that I be granted an interview with Professor Tywood.'
'Do you know where he is?'
'I am quite certain that he is in government custody.'
'Why?'
'Because I know that he was planning an experiment which would entail the breaking of security regulations. Events since, as nearly as I can make them out, flow naturally from the supposition that security regulations have indeed been broken. I can presume, then, that the experiment has at least been attempted. I must discover whether it has been successfully concluded.'
'Professor Boulder,' said the Boss, 'I believe you can read Greek.'
'Yes, I can,' - coolly.
'And have translated chemical texts for Professor Tywood on government money.'
'Yes - as a legally employed consultant'
'Yet such translation, under the circumstances, constitutes a crime, since it makes you an accessory to Tywood's crime.'
'You can establish a connection?'
'Can't you? Or haven't you heard of Tywood's notion on time travel, orÖ what do you call itÖ micro-temporal-trahslation?'
'Ah?' and Boulder smiled a little. 'He's told you, then.'
'No, he hasn't,' said the Boss, harshly. 'Professor Tywood is dead.'
'What?' Then - 'I don't believe you.'
'He died of apoplexy. Look at this.'
He had one of the photographs taken that first night in his wall safe. Tywood's face was distorted but recognizable -sprawled and dead.
Boulder 's breath went in and out as if the gears were clogged. He stared at the picture for three full minutes by the electric clock on the wall. 'Where is this place?' he asked.
'The Atomic Power Plant.'
'Had he finished his experiment?'
The Boss shrugged: There's no way of telling. He was dead when we found him.'
Boulder 's lips were pinched and colorless. 'That must be determined, somehow. A commission of scientists must be established, and, if necessary, the experiment must be repeated -'
But the Boss just looked at him, and reached for a cigar. I've never seen him take longer - and when he put it down, curled in its unused smoke, he said: 'Tywood wrote an article for a magazine, twenty years ago -'
'Oh,' and the professor's lips twisted, 'is that what gave you your clue? You may ignore that. The man is only a physical scientist and knows nothing of either history or sociology. A schoolboy's dreams and nothing more.'
'Then, you don't think sending your translation back will inaugurate a Golden Age, do you?'
'Of course not. Do you think you can graft the developments of two thousand years of slow labor onto a child society not ready for it? Do you think a great invention or a great scientific principle is born full-grown in the mind of a genius divorced from his cultural milieul Newton's enunciation of the Law of Gravity was delayed for twenty years because the then-current figure for the Earth's diameter was wrong by ten percent. Archimedes almost discovered calculus, but failed because Arabic numerals, invented by some nameless Hindu or group of Hindus, was unknown to him.
'For that matter, the mere existence of a slave society in ancient Greece and Rome meant that machines could scarcely attract much attention - slaves being so much cheaper and more adaptable. And men of true intellect could scarcely be expected to spend their energies on devices intended for manual labor. Even Archimedes, the greatest engineer of antiquity, refused to publish any of his practical inventions - only mathematic abstractions. And when a young man asked Plato of what use geometry was, he was forthwith expelled from the Academy as a man with a mean, unphilosophic soul.
'Science does not plunge forward - it inches along in the directions permitted by the greater forces that mold society and which are in turn molded by society. And no great man advances but on the shoulders of the society that surrounds him-'
The Boss interrupted him at that point. 'Suppose you tell us what your part in Tywood's work was, then. We'll take your word for it that history cannot be changed.'
'Oh it can, but not purposefully - You see, when Tywood first requested my services in the matter of translating certain textbook passages into Greek, I agreed for the money involved. But he wanted the translation on parchment; he insisted on the use of ancient Greek terminology - the language of Plato, to use his words - regardless of how I had to twist the literal significance of passages, and he wanted it hand-written in rolls.
'I was curious. I, too, found his magazine article. It was difficult for me to jump to the obvious conclusion, since the achievements of modern science transcend the imaginings of philosophy in so many ways. But I learned the truth eventually, and it was at once obvious that Tywood's theory of changing history was infantile. There are twenty million variables for every instant of time, and no system of mathematics - no mathematic psychohistory, to coin a phrase - has yet been developed to handle that ocean of varying functions.
'In short, any variation of events two thousand years ago would change all subsequent history, but in no predictable way.'
The boss suggested, with a false quietness: 'Like the pebble that starts the avalanche, right?'
'Exactly. You have some understanding of the situation, I see. I thought deeply for weeks before I proceeded, and then I realized how I must act - must act.'
There was a low roar. The Boss stood up and his chair went over backward. He swung around his desk, and he had a hand on Boulder 's throat. I was stepping out to stop him, but he waved me back -
He was only tightening the necktie a.little. Boulder could still breathe. He had gone very white, and for all the time that the Boss talked, he restricted himself to just that - breathing.
And the Boss said: 'Sure, I can see how you decided you must act. I know that some of you brain-sick philosophers think the world needs fixing. You want to throw the dice again and see what turns up. Maybe you don't even care if you're alive in the new setup - or that no one can possibly know what you've done. But you're going to create, just the same. You're going to give God another chance, so to speak.
'Maybe I just want to live - but the world could be worse. In twenty million different ways, it could be worse. A fellow named Wilder once wrote a play called The Skin of Our Teeth. Maybe you've read it. It's thesis was that Mankind survived by just that skin of their teeth. No, I'm not going to give you a speech about the Ice Age nearly wiping us out. I don't know enough. I'm not even going to talk about the Greeks winning at Marathon; the Arabs being defeated at Tours; the Mongols turning back at the last minute without even being defeated -because I'm no historian.
'But take the Twentieth Century. The Germans were stopped at the Marne twice in World War I. Dunkirk happened in World War II, and somehow the Germans were stopped at Moscow and Stalingrad. We could have used the atom bomb in the last war and we didn't, and just when it looked as if both sides would have to, the Great Compromise happened - just because General Bruce was delayed in taking off from the Ceylon airfield long enough to receive the message directly. One after the other, just like that, all through history - lucky breaks. For every "if" that didn't come true that would have made wonder-men of all of us if it had, there were twenty "ifs" that didn't come true that would have brought disaster to all of us if they had.
'You're gambling on that one-in-twenty chance - gambling every life on Earth. And you've succeeded, too, because Ty-wood did send that text back.'
He ground out that last sentence, and opened his fist, so that Boulder could fall out and back into his chair.
And Boulder laughed.
'You fool,' he gasped, bitterly, 'How close you can be and yet how widely you can miss the mark. Tywood did send his book back, then? You are sure of that?'
'No chemical textbook in Greek was found on the scene,' said the Boss, grimly, 'and millions of calories of energy had disappeared. Which doesn't change the fact, however, that we have two and a half weeks in which to - make things interesting for you.'
'Oh, nonsense. No foolish dramatics, please. Just listen to me, and try to understand. There were Greek philosophers once, named Leucippus and Democritus, who evolved an atomic theory. All matter, they said, was composed of atoms. Varieties of atoms were distinct and changeless and by their different combinations with each other formed the various substances found in nature. That theory was not the result of experiment or observation. It came into being, somehow, full-grown.
'The didactic Roman poet Lucretius, in his "De Rerum Natura," - "On the Nature of Things" - elaborated on that theory and throughout manages to sound startlingly modern.
'In Hellenistic times, Hero built a steam engine and weapons of war became almost mechanized. The period has been referred to as an abortive mechanical age, which came to nothing because, somehow, it neither grew out of nor fitted into its social and economic milieu. Alexandrian science was a queer and rather inexplicable phenomenon.
'Then one might mention the old Roman legend about the books of the Sibyl that contained mysterious information direct from the gods -
'In other words, gentlemen, while you are right that any change in the course of past events, however trifling, would have incalculable consequences, and while I also believe that you are right in supposing that any random change is much more likely to be for the worse than for the better, I must point out that you are nevertheless wrong in your final conclusions.
'Because this is the world in which the Greek chemistry text was sent back.
'This has been a Red Queen's race, if you remember your "Through the Looking Glass." In the Red, Queen's country, one had to run as fast as one could merely to stay in the same place. And so it was in this case! Tywood may have thought he was creating a new world, but it was I who prepared the translations, and I took care that only such passages as would account for the queer scraps of knowledge the ancients apparently got from nowhere would be included.
'And my only intention, for all my racing, was to stay in the same place.'
Three weeks passed; three months; three years. Nothing happened. When nothing happens, you have no proof. We gave up trying to explain, and we ended, the Boss and I, by doubting it ourselves.
The case never ended. Boulder could not be considered a criminal without being considered a world savior as well, and vice versa. He was ignored. And in the end, the case was neither solved, nor closed out; merely put in a file all by itself, under the designation '?' and buried in the deepest vault in Washington.
The Boss is in Washington now; a big wheel. And I'm Regional Head of the Bureau.
Boulder is still assistant professor, though. Promotions are slow at the University.



***



The Red Queen's Race,' my fifty-eighth story, was the first to be written by Dr. Asimov.
In September I began another story, 'Mother Earth,' and submitted it to Campbell on October 12, 1948. After a comparatively small revision of the ending, he took that one, too.






Mother Earth [10]


'But can you be certain? Are you sure that even a professional historian can always distinguish between victory and defeat?'
Gustav Stein, who delivered himself of that mocking question with a whiskered smile and a gentle wipe at the gray moustache from the neighborhood of which he had just removed an empty glass, was not an historian. He was a physiologist.
But his companion was an historian, and he accepted the gentle thrust with a smile of his own.
Stein's apartment was, for Earth, quite luxurious. It lacked the empty privacy of the Outer Worlds, of course, since from its window there stretched outward a phenomenon that belonged only to the home planet - a city. A large city, full of people, rubbing shoulders, mingling sweat -
Nor was Stein's apartment fitted with its own power and its own utility supply. It lacked even the most elementary quota of positronic robots. In short, it lacked the dignity of self-sufficiency, and like all things on Earth, it was merely part of a community, a pendant unit of a cluster, a portion of a mob.
But Stein was an Earthman by birth and used to it. And after all, by Earth standards the apartment was still luxurious.
It was just that looking outward through the same windows before which lay the city, one could see the stars and among them the Outer Worlds, where there were no cities but only gardens; where the lawns were streaks of emerald, where all human beings were kings, and where all good Earthmen earnestly and vainly hoped to go some day.
Except for a few who knew better - like Gustav Stein.
The Friday evenings with Edward Field belonged to that class of ritual which comes with age and quiet life. It broke the week pleasantly for two elderly bachelors, and gave them an innocuous reason to linger over the sherry and the stars. It took them away from the crudities of life, and, most of all, it let them talk.
Field, especially, as a lecturer, scholar and man of modest means quoted chapter and verse from his still uncompleted history of Terrestrian Empire,Ö,
'I wait for the last act,' he explained. Then I can call it the "Decline and Fall of Empire" and publish it.'
'You must expect the last act to come soon, then.'
'In a sense, it has come already. It is just that it is best to wait for all to recognize that fact. You see, there are three times when an Empire or an Economic System or a Social Institution falls, you skeptic -'
Field paused for effect and waited patiently for Stein to say, 'And those times are?'
'First,' Field ticked off a right forefinger, 'there is the time when just a little nub shows up that points an inexorable way to finality. It can't be seen or recognized until the finality arrives, when the original nub becomes visible to hindsight.'
'And you can tell what that little nub is?'
'I think so, since I already have the advantage of a century and a half of hindsight. It came when the Sirian sector colony, Aurora, first obtained permission of the Central Government at Earth to introduce positronic robots into their community life. Obviously, looking back at it, the road was clear for the development of a thoroughly mechanized society based upon robot labor and not human labor. And it is this mechanization that has been and will yet be the deciding factor in the struggle between the Outer Words and Earth.'
'It is?' murmured the psychologist. 'How infernally clever you historians are. What and where is the second time the Empire fell?'
The second point in time,' and Fiejd gently bent his right middle finger backward, 'arrives when a signpost is raised for the expert so large and plain that it can be seen even without the aid of perspective. And that point has been passed, too, with the first establishment of an immigration quota against Earth by the Outer Worlds. The fact that Earth found itself unable to prevent an action so obviously detrimental to itself was a shout for all to hear, and that was fifty years ago.'
'Better and better. And the third point?'
The third point?' Down went the ring finger. That is the least important. That is when the signpost becomes a wall with a huge "The End" scrawled upon it. The only requirement for knowing that the end has come, then, is neither perspective nor training, but merely the ability to listen to the video.'
'I take it that the third point in time has not yet come.'
'Obviously not, or you would not need to ask. Yet it may come soon; for instance, if there is war.'
'Do you think there will be?'
Field avoided commitment. 'Times are unsettled, and a good deal of futile emotion is sweeping Earth on the immigration question. And if there should be a war, Earth would be defeated quickly and lastingly, and the wall would be erected.'
'Can you be certain? Are you sure that even a professional historian can always distinguish between victory and defeat?'
Field smiled. He said: 'You may know something I do not. For instance, they talk about something called the "Pacific Project."'
'I never heard of it.' Stein refilled the two glasses, 'Let us speak of others things.'
He held up his glass to the broad window so that the far stars flickered rosily in the clear liquid and said: 'To a happy ending to Earth's troubles.'
Field held up his own, 'To the Pacific Project.'
Stein sipped gently and said: 'But we drink to two different things.'
'Do we?'
It is quite difficult to describe any of the Outer Worlds to a native Earthman, since it is not so much a description of a world that is required as a description of a state of mind. The Outer Worlds - some fifty of them, originally colonies, later domininions, later nations - differ extremely among themselves in a physical sense. But the state of mind is somewhat the same throughout.
It is something that grows out of a world not originally congenial to mankind, yet populated by the cream of the difficult, the different, the daring, the deviant.
If it is to be expressed in a word, that word is 'individuality.'
There is the world of Aurora, for instance, three parsecs from Earth. It was the first planet settled outside the Solar System, and represented the dawn of interstellar travel. Hence its name.
It had air and water to start with, perhaps, but on Earthly standards it was rocky and infertile. The plant life that did exist, sustained by a yellow-green pigment completely unrelated to chlorophyll and not as efficient, gave the comparalively fertile regions a decidedly bilious and unpleasant appearance to unaccustomed eyes. No animal life higher than unicellular, and the equivalent of bacteria as well, were present. Nothing dangerous, naturally, since the two biological systems, of Earth and Aurora, were chemically unrelated,
Aurora became, quite gradually, a patchwork. Grains and fruit trees came first; shrubs, flowers and grass afterward. Herds of livestock followed. And, as if it were necessary to prevent too close a copy of the mother planet, positronic robots also came to build the mansions, carve the landscapes, lay the power units. In short, to do the work, and turn the planet green and human.
There was the luxury of a new world and unlimited mineral resources. There was the splendid excess of atomic power laid out on new foundations with merely thousands, or, at most, millions, not billions, to service. There was the vast flowering of physical science, in worlds where there was room for it.
Take the home of Franklin Maynard, for instance, who, with his wife, three children, and twenty-seven robots, lived on an estate more than forty miles away, in distance, from the nearest neighbor. Yet by community-wave he could, if he wished, share the living room of any of the seventy-five million on Aurora - with each singly; with all simultaneously.
Maynard knew every inch of his valley. He knew just where it ended, sharply, and gave way to the alien crags, along whose undesirable slopes the angular, sharp leaves of the native furze clung sullenly - as if in hatred of the softer matter that had usurped its place in the sun.
Maynard did not have to leave that valley. He was a deputy in the Gathering, and a member of the Foreign Agents Committee, but he could transact all business but the most extremely essential, by community-wave, without ever sacrificing that precious privacy he had to have in a way no Earthman could understand.
Even the present business could be performed by community-wave. The man, for instance, who sat with him in his living room, was Charles Hijkman, and he, actually, was sitting in his own living room on an island in an artificial lake stocked with fifty varieties of fish, which happened to be twenty-five miles distant, in space.
The connection was an illusion, of course. If Maynard were to reach out a hand, he could feel the invisible wall.
Even the robots were quite accustomed to the paradox, and when Hijkman raised a hand for a cigarette, Maynard's robot made no move to satisfy the desire, though a half-minute passed before Hijkman's own robot could do so.
The two men spoke like Outer Worlders, that is, stiffly and in syllables too clipped to be friendly, and yet certainly not hostile. Merely undefmably lacking in the cream - however sour and thin at times - of human sociability which is so forced upon the inhabitants of Earth's ant heaps.
Maynard said: 'I have long wanted a private communion, Hijkman. My duties in the Gathering, this year-'
'Quite. That is understood. You are welcome now, of course. In fact, especially so, since I have heard of the superior nature of your grounds and landscaping. Is it true that your cattle are fed on imported grass?"
'I'm afraid that is a slight exaggeration. Actually, certain of my best milkers feed on Terrestrial imports during calving time, but such a procedure would be prohibitively expensive, I'm afraid, if made general. It yields quite extraordinary milk, however. May I have the privilege of sending you a day's output?"
'It would be most kind of you.' Hijkman bent his head, gravely. 'You must receive some of my salmon in return.'
To a Terrestrial eye, the two men might have appeared much alike. Both were tall, though not unusually so for Aurora, where the average height of the adult male is six feet one and one half inches. Both were blond and hard-muscled, with sharp and pronounced features. Though neither was younger than forty, middle-age as yet sat lightly upon them.
So much for amenities. Without a change in tone, Maynard proceeded to the serious purpose of his call.
He said: 'The Committee, you know, is now largely engaged with Moreanu and his Conservatives. We would like to deal with them firmly, we of the Independents, that is. But before we can do so with the requisite calm and certainty, I would like to ask you certain questions.'
'Why me?'
'Because you are Aurora 's most important physicist.'
Modesty is an unnatural attitude, and one which is only with difficulty taught to children. In an individualistic society it is useless and Hijkman was, therefore, unencumbered with it. He simply nodded objectively at Maynard's last words.
'And,' continued Maynard, 'as one of us. You are an Independent.'
'I am a member of the Party. Dues-paying, but not very active.'
'Nevertheless safe. Now, tell me, have you heard of the Pacific Project.'
'The Pacific Project?' There was a polite inquiry in his words.
'It is something which is taking place on Earth. The Pacific is a Terrestrial ocean, but the name itself probably has no significance.'
'I have never heard of it.'
'I am not surprised. Few have, even on Earth. Our communion, by the way, is via tight-beam and nothing must go further.'
'I understand.'
'Whatever Pacific Project is - and our agents are extremely vague - it might conceivably be a menace. Many of those who on Earth pass for scientists seem to be connected with it. Also, some of Earth's more radical and foolish politicians.'
'Hm-m-m. There was once something called the Manhattan Project.'
'Yes,' urged Maynard, 'what about it?'
'Oh, it's an ancient thing. It merely occurred to me because of the analogy in names. The Manhattan Project was before the time of extra-terrestrial travel. Some petty war in the dark ages occurred, and it was the name given to a group of scientists who developed atomic power.'
'Ah,' Maynard's hand became a fist, 'and what do you think the Pacific Project can do, then?'
Hijkman considered. Then, softly: 'Do you think Earth is planning war?'
On Maynard's face there was a sudden expression of distaste. 'Six billion people. Six billion half-apes, rather, jammed into one system to a near-explosion point, facing only some millions of us, total. Don't you think it is a dangerous situation?'
'Oh, numbers!'
'All right. Are we safe despite the numbers? Tell me. I'm only an administrator, and you're a physicist. Can Earth win a war in any way?'
Hijkman sat solemnly in his chair and thought carefully and slowly. Then he said: 'Let us reason. There are three broad classes of methods whereby an individual or group can gain his ends against opposition. On an increasing level of subtlety, those three classes can be termed the physical, the biological and the psychological.
'Now, the physical can be easily eliminated. Earth does not have an industrial background. It does not have a technical know-how. It has very limited resources. It lacks even a single outstanding physical scientist. So it is as impossible as anything in the Galaxy can be that they can develop any form of physico-chemical application that is not already known to the Outer Worlds. Provided, of course, that the conditions of the problem imply single-handed opposition on the part of Earth against any or all of the Outer Worlds. I take it that none of the Outer Words intends leaguing with Earth against us.'
Maynard indicated violent opposition even to the suggestion, 'No, no, no. There is no question of that. Put it out of your mind.'
'Then, ordinary physical surprise weapons are inconceivable. It is useless to discuss it further.'
'Then, what about your second class, the biological?'
Slowly, Hijkman lifted his eyebrows: 'Now, that is less certain. Some Terrestrial biologists are quite competent, I am told. Naturally, since I am myself a physicist, I am not entirely qualified to judge this. Yet I believe that in certain restricted fields, they are still expert. In agricultural science, of course, to give an obvious example. And in bacteriology. Um-m-m-'
'Yes, what about bacteriological warfare?'
'A thought! But no, no, quite inconceivable. A teeming, constricted world such as Earth cannot afford to fight an open latticework of fifty sparse worlds with germs. They are infinitely more subject to epidemics, that is, to retaliation in kind. In fact, I would say that given our living conditions here on Aurora and on the other Outer Worlds, no contagious disease could really take hold. No, Maynard. You can check with a bacteriologist, but I think he'll tell you the same.'
Maynard said: 'And the third class?'
'The psychological? Now, that is unpredictable. And yet the Outer Worlds are intelligent and healthy communities and not amenable to ordinary propaganda, or for that matter to any form of unhealthy emotionalism. Now, I wonder -'
'Yes?'
'What if the Pacific Project is just that? I mean, a huge device to keep us off balance. Something top-secret, but meant to leak out in just the right fashion, so that the Outer Worlds yield a little to Earth, simply in order to play safe.'
There was a longish silence.
'Impossible,' burst out Maynard, angrily.
'You react properly. You hesitate. But I don't seriously press the interpretation. It is merely a thought.' A longer silence, then Hijkman spoke again: 'Are there any other questions?'
Maynard started out of a reverie, 'NoÖ no -'
The wave broke off and a wall appeared where space had been a moment before.
Slowly, with stubborn disbelief, Franklin Maynard shook his head.
Ernest Keilin mounted the stairs with a feeling for all the past centuries. The building was old, cobwebbed with history. It once housed the Parliament of Man, and from it words went out that clanged throughout the stars.
It was a tall building. It soared - stretched - strained. Out and up to the stars, it reached; to the stars that had now turned away.
It no longer even housed the Parliament of Earth. That had now been switched to a newer, neoclassical building, one that imperfectly aped the architectural stylisms of the ancient pre-Atomic age.
Yet the older building still held its great name. Officially, it was still Stellar House, but it only housed the functionaries of a shriveled bureaucracy now.
Keilin got out at the twelfth floor, and the lift dropped quickly down behind him. The radiant sign said smoothly and quietly: Bureau of Information. He handed a letter to the receptionist. He waited. And eventually, he passed through the door which said, 'L. Z. Cellioni - Secretary of Information.'
Cellioni was little and dark. His hair was thick and black, his mustache thin and black. His teeth, when he smiled, were startlingly white and even - so he smiled often.
He was smiling now, as he rose and held out his hand. Keilin took it, then an offered seat, then an offered cigar.
Cellioni said: 'I am very happy to see you, Mr. Keilin. It is kind of you to fly here from New York on such short notice.'
Keilin curved the corners of his lips down and made a tiny gesture with one hand, deprecating the whole business.
'And now,' continued Cellioni, 'I presume you would like an explanation of all this.'
'I wouldn't refuse one,' said Keilin.
'Unfortunately, it is difficult to know exactly how to explain. As Secretary of Information, my position is difficult. I must safeguard the security and well-being of Earth and, at the same time, observe our traditional freedom of the press. Naturally, and fortunately, we have no censorship, but just as naturally, there are times when we could almost wish we did have.'
'Is this,' asked Keilin, 'with reference to me? About censorship, I mean?'
Cellioni did not answer directly. Instead, he smiled again, slowly, and with a remarkable absence of joviality.
He said: 'You, Mr. Keilin, have one of the most widely heard and influential telecasts on the video. Therefore, you are of peculiar interest to the government.'
The time is mine,' said Keilin, stubbornly. 'I pay for it. I pay taxes on the income I derive from it. I adhere to all the common-law rulings on taboos. So I don't quite see of what interest I can be to the government.'
'Oh, you misunderstand me. It's my fault, I suppose, for not being clearer. You have committed no crime, broken no laws. I have only admiration for your journalistic ability. What I refer to is your editorial attitude at times.'
'With respect to what?'
'With respect,' said Cellioni, with a sudden harshness about his thin lips, 'to our policy toward the Outer Worlds.'
'My editorial attitude represents what I feel and think, Mr. Secretary.'
'I allow this. You have your right to your feelings and your thoughts. Yet it is injudicious to spread them about nightly to an audience of half a billion.'
'Injudicious, according to you, perhaps. But legal, according to anybody.'
'It is sometimes necessary to place good of country above a strict and selfish interpretation of legality.'
Keilin tapped his foot twice and frowned blackly.
'Look,' he said, 'put this frankly. What is it you want?'
The Secretary of Information spread his hands out before him. 'In a word - co-operation! Really, Mr. Keilin, we can't have you weakening the will of the people. Do you appreciate the position of Earth? Six billions, and a declining food supply! It is insupportable! And emigration is the only solution. No patriotic Earthman can fail to see the justice of our position. No reasonable human being anywhere can fail to see the justice of it.'
Keilin said: 'I agree with your premise that the population problem is serious, but emigration is not the only solution. In fact, emigration is the one sure way of hastening destruction.'
'Really? And why do you say that?'
'Because the Outer Worlds will not permit emigration, and you can force their hand by war only. And we cannot win a war.'
'Tell me,' said Cellioni softly, 'have you ever tried emigrating? It seems to me you could qualify. You are quite tall, rather light-haired, intelligent -'
The video-man flushed. He said, curtly: 'I have hay fever.'
'Well,' and the secretary smiled, 'then you must have good reason for disapproving their arbitrary genetic and racist policies.'
Keilin replied with heat: 'I won't be influenced by personal motives. I would disapprove their policies, if I qualified perfectly for emigration. But my disapproval would alter nothing. Their policies are their policies, and they can enforce them. Moreover, their policies have some reason even if wrong. Mankind is starting again on the Outer Worlds, and they - the ones who got there first - would like to eliminate some of the flaws of the human mechanism that have become obvious with time. A hay fever sufferer is a bad egg - genetically. A cancer prone even more so. Their prejudices against skin and hair colors are, of course, senseless, but I can grant that they are interested in uniformity and homogeneity. And as for Earth, we can do much even without the help of the Outer Worlds.'
'For instance, what?'
'Positronic robots and hydroponic farming should be introduced, and - most of all - birth control must be instituted. An intelligent birth control, that is, based on firm psychiatric principles intended to eliminate the psychotic trends, congenital infirmities -'
'As they do in the Outer Worlds -'
'Not at all. I have mentioned no racist principles. I talk only of mental and physical infirmities that are held in common by all ethnic and racial groups. And most of all, births must be held below deaths until a healthful equilibrium is reached.'
Cellioni said, grimly: 'We lack the industrial techniques and the resources to introduce a robot-hydroponic technology in anything less than five centuries. Furthermore, the traditions of Earth, as well as current ethical beliefs, forbid robot labor and false foods. Most of all, they forbid the slaughter of unborn children. Now, come, Keilin, we can't have you pouring this out over video. It won't work; it distracts the attention; it wakens the will.'
Keilin broke in, impatiently: 'Mr. Secretary, do you want war?'
'Do I want war? That is an impudent question.'
'Then, who are the policy-makers in the government who do want war? For instance, who is responsible for the calculated rumor of the Pacific Project?'
'The Pacific Project? And where did you hear of that?'
'My sources are my secret.'
'Then, I'll tell you. You heard of this Pacific Project from Moreanu of Aurora on his recent trip to Earth. We know more about you than you suppose, Mr. Keilin.'
'I believe that, but I do not admit that I received information from Moreanu. Why do you think I could get information from him? Is it because he was deliberately allowed to learn of this piece of trumpery?'
Trumpery?'
'Yes. I think Pacific Project is a fake. A fake meant to inspire confidence. I think the government plans to let the so-called secret leak out in order to strengthen its war policy. It is part of a war of nerves on Earth's own people, and it will be the ruin of Earth in the end.'
'And I will take this theory of mine to the people.'
'You will not, Mr. Keilin,' said Cellioni, quietly.
'I will.'
'Mr. Keilin, your friend, Ion Moreanu is having his troubles on Aurora, perhaps for being too friendly with you. Take care that you do not have equal trouble for being too friendly with him.'
'I'm not worried.' The video man laughed shortly, lunged to his feet and strode to the door.
Keilin smiled very gently when he found the door blocked by two large men: 'You mean, I arn under arrest right now.' 'Exactly,' said Cellioni. 'On what charge?' 'We'll think ot some later.' Kelin left - under escort
On Aurora, the mirror image of the afore-described events was taking place, and on a larger scale.
The Foreign Agents Committee of the Gathering had been meeting now for days - ever since the session of the Gathering in which Ion Moreanu and his Conservative Party made their great bid to force a vote of no confidence. That it had failed was in part due to the superior political generalship of the Independents, and in some part due to the activity of this same Foreign Agents Committee.
For months now, the evidence had been accumulating, and when the vote of confidence turned out to be sizably in favor of the Independents, the Committee was able to strike in its own way.
Moreanu was subpoenaed in his own home, and placed under house arrest. Although this procedure of house arrest was not, under the circumstances, legal - a fact emphatically pointed out by Moreanu - it was nevertheless successfully accomplished.
For three days Moreanu was cross-examined thoroughly, in polite, even tones that scarcely ever veered from unemotional curiosity. The seven inquisitors of the Committee took turns in questioning, but Moreanu had respite only for ten-minute intervals during the hours in which the Committee sat.
After three days, he showed the effects. He was hoarse with demanding that he be faced with his accusers; weary with insisting that he be informed of the exact nature of the charges; throat-broken with shouting against the illegality of the procedure.
The Committee finally read statements at him -
'Is this true or not? Is this true or not?'
Moreanu could merely shake his head wearily as the structure spidered about him.
He challenged the competency of the evidence and was smoothly informed that the proceedings constituted a Committee Investigation and not a trial -
The chairman clapped his gavel, finally. He was a broad man of tremendous purpose. He spoke for an hour in his final summing up of the results of the inquiry, but only a relatively short portion of it need be quoted.
He said: 'If you had merely conspired with others on Aurora, we could understand you, even forgive you. Such a fault would have been held in common with many ambitious men in history. It is not that at all. What horrifies us and removes all pity is your eagerness to consort with the disease-ridden, ignorant and subhuman remnants of Earth.
'You, the accused, stand here under a heavy weight of evidence showing you to have conspired with the worst elements of Earth's mongrel population -'
The chairman was interrupted by an agonized cry from Moreanu, 'But the motive! What motive can you possibly attribute -'
The accused was pulled back into his seat. The chairman pursed his lips and departed from the slow gravity of his prepared speech to improvise a bit.
'It is not,' he said, 'for this Committee to go into your motives. We have shown the facts of the case. The Committee does have evidence -' He paused, and looked along the line of the members to the right and the left, then continued. 'I think I may say that the Committee has evidence that points to your intentions to use Earth manpower to engineer a coup that would leave you dictator over Aurora. But since the evidence has not been used, I will go no further into that, except to say that such a consummation is not inconsistent with your character as displayed at these hearings.'
He went back to his speech. Those of us who sit here have heard, I think, of something termed the "Pacific Project," which, according to rumors, represents an attempt on the part of Earth to retrieve its lost dominions.
'It is needless to emphasize here that any such attempt must be doomed to failure. And yet defeat for us is not entirely inconceivable. One thing can cause us to stumble, and that one thing is an unsuspected internal weakness. Genetics is, after all, still an imperfect science. Even with twenty generations behind us, undesirable traits may crop up at scattered points, and each represents a flaw in the steel shield of Aurora 's strength.
'That is the Pacific Project - the use of our own criminals and traitors against us; and if they can find such in our inner councils, the Earthmen might even succeed.
'The Foreign Agents Committee exists to combat that threat. In the accused, we touch the fringes of the web. We must go on-'
The speech did, at any rate.
When it was concluded, Moreanu, pale, wide-eyed, pounded his fist, 'I demand my say -'
'The accused may speak,' said the chairman.
Moreanu rose and looked about him for a long moment. The room, fitted for an audience of seventy-five million by Community Wave, was unattended. There were the inquisitors, legal staff, official recorders - And with him, in the actual flesh, his guards.
He would have done better with an audience. To whom could he otherwise appeal? His glance fled hopelessly from each face it touched, but could find nothing better.
'First,' he said, 'I deny the legality of this meeting. My constitutional rights of privacy and individuality have been denied. I have been tried by a group without standing as a court, by individuals convinced, in advance, of my guilt. I have been denied adequate opportunity to defend myself. In fact, I have been treated throughout as an already convicted criminal requiring only sentence.
'I deny, completely and without reservation, that I have been engaged in any activity detrimental to the state or tending to subvert any of its fundamental institutions.
'I accuse, vigorously and unreservedly, this Committee of deliberately using its powers to win political battles. I am guilty not of treason, but of disagreement. I disagree with a policy dedicated to the destruction of the larger part of the human race for reasons that are trivial and inhumane.
'Rather than destruction, we owe assistance to these men who are condemned to a harsh, unhappy life solely because it was our ancestors and not theirs who happened to reach the Outer Worlds first. With our technology and resources, they can yet re-create and redevelop -'
The chairman's voice rose above the intense near-whisper of Moreanu, 'You are out of order. The Committee is quite prepared to hear any remarks you make in your own defense, but a sermon on the rights of Earthmen is outside the legitimate realm of the discussion.'
The hearings were formally closed. It was a great political victory for the Independents; all would agree to that. Of the members of the Committee, only Franklin Maynard was not completely satisfied. A small, nagging doubt remained.
He wondered -
Should he try, one last time? Should he speak once more and then no more to that queer little monkey ambassador from Earth? He made his decision quickly and acted upon it instantly. Only a pause to arrange a witness, since even for himself an unwitnessed private communion with an Earthman might be dangerous.
Luiz Moreno, Ambassador to Aurora from Earth, was, to put not too fine a point on it, a miserable figure of a man. And that wasn't exactly an accident. On the whole, the foreign diplomats of Earth tended to be dark, short, wizen, or weakly -or all four.
That was only self-protection, since the Outer Worlds exerted strong attraction for any Earthman. Diplomats exposed to the allure of Aurora, for instance, could not but be exceedingly reluctant to return to Earth. Worse, and more dangerous, exposure meant a growing sympathy with the demigods of the stars and a growing alienation from the slum-dwellers of Earth.
Unless, of course, the ambassador found himself rejected. Unless he found himself somewhat despised. And then, no more faithful servant of Earth could be imagined, no man less subject to corruption.
The Ambassador to Earth was only five foot two, with a bald head and receding forehead, a pinkish affectation of beard and red-rimmed eyes. He was suffering from a slight cold, the occasional results whereof he smothered in a handkerchief. And yet, withal, he was a man of intellect.
To Franklin Maynard, the sight and sound of the Earthman was distressing. He grew queasy at each cough and shuddered when the ambassador wiped his nose.
Maynard said: 'Your excellency, we commune at my request because I wish to inform you that the Gathering has decided to ask your recall by your government.'
'That is kind of you, councilor. I had an inkling of this. And for what reason?'
'The reason is not within the bounds of discussion. I believe it is the prerogative of a sovereign state to decide for itself whether a foreign representative shall be persona grata or not. Nor do I think you really need enlightenment on this matter.'
'Very well, then.' The ambassador paused to wield his handkerchief and murmur an apology. 'Is that all?'
Maynard said: 'Not quite. There are matters I would like to mention. Remain!'
The ambassador's reddened nostrils flared a bit, but he smiled, and said: 'An honor.'
'Your world, excellency,' said Maynard, superciliously, 'displays a certain belligerence of late that we on Aurora find most annoying and unnecessary. I trust that you will find your return to Earth at this point a convenient opportunity to use your influence against further displays such as recently occurred in New York, where two Aurorans were manhandled by a mob. The payment of an indemnity may not be enough the next time.'
'But that is emotional overflow, Councilor Maynard. Surely, you cannot consider youngsters shouting in the streets to be adequate representations of belligerence.'
'It is backed by your government's actions in many ways. The recent arrest of Mr. Ernest Keilin, for instance.'
'Which is a purely domestic affair,' said the ambassador, quietly.
'But not one to demonstrate a reasonable spirit toward the Outer Worlds. Keilin was one of the few Earthmen who until recently could yet make their voices heard. He was intelligent enough to realize that no divine right protects the inferior man simply because he is inferior.'
The ambassador arose: 'I am not interested in Auroran theories on racial differences.'
'A moment. Your government may realize that much of their plans have gone awry with the arrest of your agent, Moreanu. Stress the fact that we of Aurora are much wiser than we have been prior to this arrest. It may serve to give them pause.'
'Is Moreanu my agent? Really, councilor, if I am dis-accredited, I shall leave. But surely the loss of diplomatic immunity does not affect my personal immunity as an honest man from charges of espionage.'
'Isn't that your job?'
'Do Aurorans take it for granted that espionage and diplomacy are identical? My government will be glad to hear it. We shall take appropriate precautions.'
'Then, you defend Moreanu? You deny that he has been working for Earth?'
'I defend only myself. As to Moreanu, I am not stupid enough to say anything.'
'Why stupid?'
Wouldn't a defense by myself be but another indictment against him? I neither accuse nor defend him. Your government's quarrel with Moreanu, like my government's with Keilin - whom you, by the way, are most suspiciously eager to defend - is an internal affair. I will leave now.'
The communion broke, and almost instantly the wall faded again. Hijkman was looking thoughtfully at Maynard.
'What do you think of him?' asked Maynard, grimly.
'Disgraceful that such a travesty of humanity should walk Aurora, I think.'
'I agree with you, and yetÖ and yet -*
'Well?'
'And yet I can almost find myself able to think that he is the master and that we dance to his piping. You know of Moreanu?'
'Of course.'
Well, he will be convicted, sent to an asteroid. His party will be broken. Offhand, anyone would say that such actions represent a horrible defeat for Earth.'
'Is there doubt in your mind that such is the case?'
'I'm not sure. Committee Chairman Hond insisted on airing his theory that Pacific Project was the name Earth gave to a device for using internal traitors on the Outer Worlds. But I don't think so. I'm not sure the facts fit that. For instance, where did we get our evidence against Moreanu?'
'I certainly can't say.'
'Our agents, in the first place. But how did they get it? The evidence was a little too convincing. Moreanu could have guarded himself better -'
Maynard hesitated. He seemed to be attempting a blush, and failing. Well, to put it quickly, I think it was the Terrestrian Ambassador who somehow presented us with the most evidence. I think that he played on Moreanu's sympathy for Earth first to befriend him and then to betray him.'
Why?'
'I don't know. To insure war, perhaps - with this Pacific Project waiting for us.'
'I don't believe it.'
'I know. I have no proof. Nothing but suspicion. The Committee wouldn't believe me either. It seemed to me, perhaps, that a last talk with the ambassador might reveal something, but his mere appearance antagonizes me, and I find I spend most of my time trying to remove him from my sight.'
'Well, you are becoming emotional, my friend. It is a disgusting weakness. I hear that you have been appointed a delegate to the Interplanetary Gathering at Hesperus. I congratulate you.'
'Thanks,' said Maynard, absently.
Luiz Moreno, ex-Ambassador to Aurora, had been glad to return to Earth. He was away from the artificial landscapes that seemed to have no life of their own, but to exist only by virtue of the strong will of their possessors. Away from the too-beautiful men and women and from their ubiquitous, brooding robots.
He was back to the hum of life and the shuffle of feet; the brushing of shoulders and the feeling of breath in the face.
Not that he was able to enjoy these sensations entirely. The first days had been spent in lively conferences with the heads of Earth's government.
In fact, it was not till nearly a week had passed, that an hour came in which he could consider himself truly relaxed.
He was in the rarest of all appurtenances of Terrestrial Luxury - a roof garden. With him was Gustav Stein, the quite obscure physiologist, who was, nevertheless, one of the prime movers of the Plan, known to rumor as the Pacific Project.
'The confirmatory tests,' said Moreno, with an almost dreadful satisfaction, 'all check so far, do they not?'
'So far. Only so far. We have miles to go."
'Yet they will continue to go well. To one who has lived on Aurora for nearly a year, as I have, there can be no doubt but that we're on the right track.'
'Um-m-m, Nevertheless, I will go only by the laboratory reports.'
'And quite rightly.' His little body was almost stiff with gloating. 'Some day, it will be different. Stein, you have not met these men, these Outer Worlders. You may have come across the tourists, perhaps, in their special hotels, or riding through the streets in inclosed cars, equipped with the purest of private, air-conditioned atmospheres for their well-bred nostrils; observing the sights through a movable periscope and shuddering away from the touch of an Earthman.
'But you have not met them on their own world, secure in then' own sickly, rotting greatness. Go, Stein, and be despised a while. Go, and find how well you can compete with their own trained lawns as something to be gently trod upon.
'And yet, when I pulled the proper cords, Ion Moreanu fell - Ion Moreanu, the only man among them with the capacity to understand the workings of another's mind. It is the crisis that we have passed now. We front a smooth path now.'
Satisfaction! Satisfaction!
'As for Keiliri,' he said suddenly, more to himself than to Stein, 'he can be turned loose now. There's little he can say, hereafter, that can endanger anything. In fact, I have an idea. The interplanetary Conference opens on Hesperus within the month. He can be sent to report the meeting. It will be an earnest of our friendliness - and keep him away for the summer. I think it can be arranged.'
It was.
Of all the Outer Worlds, Hesperus was the smallest, the latest settled, the furthest from Earth. Hence the name. In a physical sense, it was not best suited to a great diplomatic gathering, since its facilities were small. For instance, the available community-wave network could not possibly be stretched to cover all the delegates, secretarial staff, and administrators necessary in a convocation of fifty planets. So meetings in person were arranged in buildings impressed for the purpose.
Yet there was a symbolism in the choice of meeting place that escaped practically nobody. Hesperus, of all the Worlds, was furthest removed from Earth. But the spatial distance -one hundred parsecs or more - was the least of it. The important point was that Hesperus had been colonized not by Earthmen, but by men from the Outer World of Faunus.
It was therefore of the second generation, and so it had no 'Mother Earth.' Earth to it was but a vague grandmother, lost in the stars.
As is usual in all such gatherings, little work is actually done on the session floors. That space is reserved for the official soundings of whatever is primarily intended for home ears. The actual swapping and horse-trading takes place in the lobbies and at the lunch-tables and many of irresolvable conflict has softened over the soup and vanished over the nuts.
And yet particular difficulties were present in this particular case. Not in all worlds was the community-wave as paramount and all-pervading as it was on Aurora, but it was prominent in all. It was, therefore, with a certain sense of outrage and loss that the tall, dignified men found it necessary to approach one another in the flesh, without the comforting privacy of the invisible wall between, without the warm knowledge of the breakswitch at their fingertips.
They faced one another in uneasy semi-embarrassment and tried not to watch one another eat; tried not to shrink at the unmeant touch. Even robot service was rationed.
Ernest Keilin, the only accredited video-representative from Earth, was aware of some of these matters only in the vague way they are described here. A more precise insight he could not have. Nor could anyone brought up in a society where human beings exist only in the plural, and where a house need only be deserted to be feared.
So it was that certain of the most subtle tensions escaped him at the formal dinner party given by the Hesperian government during the third week of the conference. Other tensions, however, did not pass him by.
The gathering after the dinner naturally fell apart into little groups. Keilin joined the one that contained Franklin May-nard of Aurora. As the delegate of the largest of the Worlds, he was naturally the most newsworthy.
Maynard was speaking casually between sips at the tawny Hesperian cocktail in his hand. If his flesh crawled slightly at the closeness of the others, he masked the feeling masterfully.
'Earth,' he said, 'is, in essence, helpless against us if we avoid unpredictable military adventures. Economic unity is actually a necessity, if we intend to avoid such adventures. Let Earth realize to how great an extent her economy depends upon us, on the things that we alone can supply her, and there will be no more talk of living space. And if we are united, Earth would never dare attack. She will exchange her barren longings for atomic motors - or not, as she pleases.'
And he turned to regard Keilin with a certain hauteur as the other found himself stung to comment:
'But your manufactured goods, councilor - I mean those you ship to Earth - they are not given us. They are exchanged for agricultural products.'
Maynard smiled silkily. 'Yes, I believe the delegate from Tethys has mentioned that fact at length. There is a delusion prevalent among some of us that only Terrestrial seeds grow properly -'
He was interrupted calmly by another, who said: 'Now, I am not from Tethys, but what you mention is not a delusion. I grow rye on Rhea, and I have never yet been able to duplicate Terrestrial bread. It just hasn't got the same taste.' He addressed the audience in general, 'In fact, I imported half a dozen Terrestrians five years back on agricultural laborer visas so they could oversee the robots. Now, they can do wonders with the land, you know. Where they spit, corn grows fifteen feet high. Well, that helped a little. And using Terrestrian seed helped. But even if you grow Terrestrian grain, its seed won't hold the next year.'
'Has your soil been tested by your government's agricultural department?' asked Maynard.
The Rhean grew haughty in his turn: 'No better soil in the sector. And the rye is top-grade. I even sent a hundredweight down to Earth for nutritional clearance, and it came back with full marks.' He rubbed one side of his chin, thoughtfully: 'It's flavor I'm talking about. Doesn't seem to have the right -'
Maynard made an effort to dismiss him: 'Flavor is dispensable temporarily. They'll be coming to us on our terms, these little-men-hordes of Earth, when they feel the pinch. We give up only this mysterious flavor, but they will have to give up atom-powered engines, farm machinery, and ground cars. It wouldn't be a bad idea, in fact, to attempt to get along without the Terrestrian flavors you are so concerned about. Let us appreciate the flavor of our home-grown products instead -which could stand comparison if we gave it a chance.'
'That so?' the Rhean smiled. 'I notice you're smoking Earth-grown tobacco.'
'A habit I can break if I have to.'
'Probably by giving up smoking. I wouldn't use Outer World tobacco for anything but killing mosquitoes.'
He laughed a trifle too boisterously, and left the group. Maynard stared after him, a little pinch-nosed.
To Keilin, the little byplay over rye and tobacco brought a certain satisfaction. He regarded such personalities as the tiny reflection of certain Galactopolitical realities. Tethys and Rhea were the largest planets in the Galactic south, as Aurora was the largest in the Galactic north. All three planets were identically racist, identically exclusivist. Their views on Earth were similar and completely compatible. Ordinarily, one would think that there was no room to quarrel.
But Aurora was the oldest of the Outer Worlds, the most advanced, the strongest militarily - and, therefore, aspired to a sort of moral leadership of all the Worlds. That was sufficient in itself to arouse opposition, and Rhea and Tethys served as focal points for those who did not recognize Auroran leadership.
Keilin was somberly grateful for that situation. If Earth could but lean her weight properly, first in one direction, then in the other, an, ultimate spilt, or even fragmentation -
He eyed Maynard cautiously, almost furtively, and wondered what effect this would have on the next day's debate. Already, the Auroran was more silent than was quite polite.
And then some under-secretary or sub-official threaded his way through the clusters of guests in finicking fashion, and beckoned to Maynard.
Keilin's following eyes watched the Auroran retreat with the newcomer, watched him listen closely, mouth a startled 'What!' that was quite visible to the eye, though too far off to be heard, and then reach for a paper that the other handed Mm.
And as a result, the next day's session of the conference went entirely differently than Keilin would have predicted.
Keilin discovered the details in the evening video-casts. The Terrestrian government, it seemed, had sent a note to all the governments attending the conference. It warned each one bluntly that any agreement among them in military or economic affairs would be considered an unfriendly act against Earth and that it would be met with appropriate counter-measures. The note denounced Aurora, Tethys and Rhea all equally. It accused them of being engaged in an imperialist conspiracy against Earth, and so on - and on - and on.
Tools!' gritted Keilin, all but butting his head against the wall out of sheer chagrin. 'Fools! Fools! Fools!' And his voice died away still muttering that same, one word.
The next session of the conference was well and early attended by a set of angry delegates who were only too eager to grind into nothingness the disagreements still outstanding. When it ended, all matters concerning trade between Earth and the Outer Worlds had been placed in the hands of a commission with plenary powers.
Not even Aurora could have expected so complete and easy a victory, and Keilin, on his way back to Earth, longed for Ms voice to reach the video, so that it could be to others, and not to himself only, that he could shout his disgust.
Yet, on Earth, some men smiled.
Once back on Earth, the voice of Keilin slowly swirled under and down - lost in the noisier clamor that shouted for action.
His popularity sank in proportion as trade restrictions grew. Slowly, the Outer Worlds drew the noose tighter. First, they instituted a strict application of a new system of export licensing. Secondly, they banned the export to Earth of all materials capable of being 'used in a war effort.' And finally they applied a very broad interpretation indeed of what could be considered usable in such a connection.
Imported luxuries - and imported necessities, too, for that matter - vanished or priced themselves upwards out of the reach of all but the very few.
So the people marched, and the voices shouted and the banners swung about in the sunlight, and the stones flew at the consulates -
Keilin shouted hoarsely and felt as if he were going mad.
Until, suddenly, Luiz Moreno, quite of his own accord, offered to appear on Keilin's program and submit to unrestricted questioning in his capacity as ex-Ambassador to Aurora and present Secretary without Portfolio.
To Keilin it had had all the possibilities of a rebirth. He knew Moreno - no fool, he. With Moreno on his program, he was assured an audience as great as his greatest. With Moreno answering questions, certain misapprehensions might be removed, certain confusions might be straightened. The mere fact that Moreno wished to use his - his - program as sounding board might well mean that already a more pliant and sensible foreign policy might have been decided upon. Perhaps Maynard was correct, and the pinch was being felt and was working as predicted.
The list of questions had, of course, been submitted to Moreno in advance, but the ex-Ambassador had indicated that he would answer all of them, and any follow-up questions that might seem necessary.
It seemed quite ideal. Too ideal, perhaps, but only a criminal fool could worry over minutiae at this point.
There was an adequate ballyhoo - and when they faced one another across the little table, the red needle that indicated the number of video sets drawing power on that channel hovered well over the two hundred million mark. And there was an average of 2.7 listeners per video set. Now the theme; the official introduction.
Keilin rubbed his cheek slowly, as he waited for the signal.
Then, he began:
Q. Secretary Moreno, the question which interests all Earth at the moment, concerns the possibility of war. Suppose we start with that. Do you think there will be war?
A. If Earth is the only planet to be considered, I say: No, definitely not. In its history, Earth has had too much war, and has learned many times over how little can be gained by it.
Q. You say, 'If Earth is the only planet to be considered -' Do you imply that factors outside our control will bring war?
A. I do not say 'will'; but I could say 'may.' I cannot, of course speak for the Outer Worlds. I cannot pretend to know their motivations and intentions at this critical moment in Galactic history. They may choose war. I hope not. If so be that they do, however, we will defend ourselves. But in any case, we will never attack; we will not strike the first blow.
Q. Am I right in saying, then, that in your opinion there are no basic differences between Earth and the Outer Worlds, which cannot be solved by negotiation?
A. You certainly are. If the Outer Worlds were sincerely desirous of a solution, no disagreement between them and us could long exist.
Q. Does that include the question of immigration?
A. Definitely. Our own role in the matter is clear and beyond reproach. As matters stand, two hundred million human beings now occupy ninety-five percent of the available land in the universe. Six billions - that is, ninety-seven percent of all mankind - are squeezed into the other five percent. Such a situation is obviously unjust and, worse, unstable. Yet Earth, in the face of such injustice, has always been willing to treat this problem as soluble by degrees. It is still so willing. We should agree to reasonable quotas and reasonable restrictions. Yet the Outer Worlds have refused to discuss this matter. Over a space of five decades, they have rebuffed all efforts on the part of Earth to open negotiations.
Q. If such an attitude on the part of the Outer Worlds continues, do you then think there will be war?
A. I cannot believe that this attitude will continue. Our government will not cease hoping that the Outer Worlds will eventually reconsider their stand on the matter; that their sense of justice and right is not dead, but only sleeping.
Q. Mr. Secretary, let us pass on to another subject. Do you think that the United Worlds Commission set up by the Outer Worlds recently to control trade with Earth represents a danger to peace?
A. In the sense that its actions indicate a desire on the part of the Outer Worlds to isolate Earth, and to weaken it economically, I can say that it does.
Q. To what actions do you refer, sir?
A. To its actions in restricting interstellar trade with Earth to the point where, in credit values, the total stands now at least than ten percent of what it did three months ago.
Q. But do such restrictions really represent an economic danger to Earth? For instance, it is not true that trade with the Outer Worlds represents an almost insignificant part of total Terrestrian trade? And is it not true that the importations from the Outer Worlds reach only a tiny minority of the population at best?
A. Your questions now are representative of a profound fallacy which is very common among our isolationists. In credit values, it is true that interstellar trade represents only five percent of our total trade, but ninety-five percent of our atomic engines are imported. Eighty percent of our thorium, sixty-five percent of our cesium, sixty percent of our molybdenum and tin are imported. The list can be extended almost indefinitely, and it is quite easy to see that the five percent is an extremely important, a vital, five percent. Furthermore, if a large manufacturer receives a shipment of atomic steel-shapers from Rhea, it does not follow that the benefit redounds only to him. Every man on Earth who uses steel implements or objects manufactured by steel implements benefits.
Q. But is it not true that the current restrictions on Earth's interstellar trade have cut our grain and cattle exports to almost nothing? And far from harming Earth, isn't this really a boon to our own hungry people?
A, This is another serious fallacy. That Earth's good food supply is tragically inadequate is true. The government would be the last to deny it. But our food exports do not represent any serious drain upon this supply. Less than one fifth of one percent of Earth's food is exported, and in return we obtain, for instance, fertilizers and farm machinery which more than make up for that small loss by increasing agricultural efficiency. Therefore, by buying less food from us, the Outer Worlds are engaged, in effect, in cutting our already inadequate food supply.
Q. Are you ready to admit, then, Secretary Moreno, that at least part of the blame for this situation should rest with Earth itself? In other words, we come to my next question: Was it not a diplomatic blunder of the first magnitude for the government to issue its inflammatory note denouncing the intentions of the Outer Worlds before those intentions had been made clear at the Interplanetary Conference?
A. I think those intentions were quite clear at the time.
Q. I beg pardon, sir, but I was at the conference. At the time the note was issued, there was almost a stalemate among the Outer World delegates. Those of Rhea and Tethys strongly opposed economic action against Earth, and there was considerable chance that Aurora and its block might have been defeated. Earth's note ended that possibility instantly.
A. Well, what is your question, Mr. Keilin?
Q. In view of my statements, do you or do you not think Earth's note to have been a criminal error of diplomacy which can now be made up only by a policy of intelligent conciliation?
A. You use strong language. However, I cannot answer the question directly, since I do not agree with your major premise. I cannot believe that the delegates of the Outer Worlds could behave in the manner you describe. In the first place, it is well known that the Outer Worlds are proud of their boast that the percentage of insanity, psychoses and even relatively minor maladjustments of personality are almost at the vanishing point in their society. It is one of their strongest arguments against Earth, that we have more psychiatrists than plumbers and yet are more pinched for want of the former. The delegates to the conference represented the best of this so-stable society. And now you would have me believe that these demigods would, in a moment of pique, have reversed their opinions and instituted a major change in the economic policy of fifty worlds. I cannot believe them capable of such childish and perverse activity, and must therefore insist that any action they took was based not upon any note from Earth, but upon motivations that go deeper.
Q. But I saw the effect upon them with my own eyes, sir. Remember, they were being scolded in what they considered to be insolent language from an inferior people. There can be no doubt, sir, that as a whole, the men of the Outer Worlds are a remarkably stable people, despite your sarcasm, but their attitude toward Earth represents a weak point in this stability.
A. Are you asking me questions, or are you defending the racist views and policies of the Outer Worlds?
Q. Well, accepting your viewpoint that Earth's note did no harm, what good could it have done? Why should it have been sent?
A. I think we were justified in presenting our side of the question before the bar of Galactic public opinion. I believe we have exhausted the subject. What is your next question, please? It is the last, isn't it?
Q. It is. It has recently been reported that the Terrestrian government will take stern measures against those dealing in smuggling operations. Is this consistent with the government's view that lowered trade relations are detrimental to Earth's welfare?
A. Our primary concern is peace, and not our own immediate welfare. The Outer Worlds have adopted certain trade restrictions. We disapprove of them, and consider them a great injustice. Nevertheless, we shall adhere to them, so that no planet may say that we have given the slightest pretext for hostilities. For instance, I am privileged to announce here for the first time that in the past month, five ships, traveling under false Earth registry, were stopped while being engaged in the smuggling of Outer World materiel into Earth. Their goods were confiscated and their personnel imprisoned. This is an earnest of our good intentions.
Q. Outer World ships?
A. Yes. But traveling under false Earth registry, remember.
Q. And the men imprisoned are citizens of the Outer Worlds?
A. I believe so. However, they were breaking not only our laws, but those of the Outer Worlds as well, and therefore doubly forfeited their interplanetary rights. I think the interview had better close, now.
Q. But this -
It was at this point that the broadcast came to a sudden end. The conclusion of Keilin's last sentence was never heard by anyone but Moreno. It ended like this:
'- means war.'
But Luiz Moreno was no longer on the air. So as he drew on his gloves, he smiled and, with infinite meaning, shrugged his shoulders in a little gesture of indifference.
There were no witnesses to that shrug.
The Gathering at Aurora was still in session. Franklin May-nard had dropped out for the moment in utter weariness. He faced his son, whom he now saw for the first time in naval uniform.
'At least you're sure of what will happen, aren't you?'
In the young man's response, there was no weariness at all, no apprehension; nothing but utter satisfaction. 'This is it, dad!'
'Nothing bothers you, then? You don't think we've been maneuvered into this.'
'Who cares if we have? It's Earth's funeral.'
Maynard shook his head: 'But you realize that we've been put in the wrong. The Outer World citizens they hold are lawbreakers. Earth is within its rights.'
His son frowned: 'I hope you're not going to make statements like that to the Gathering, dad. I don't see that Earth is justified at all. All right, what if smuggling was going on? It was just because some Outer Worlders are willing to pay black market prices for Terrestrial food. If Earth had any sense, she could look the other way, and everyone would benefit. She makes enough noise about how she needs our trade, so why doesn't she do something about it? Anyway, I don't see that we ought to leave any good Aurorans or other Outer Worlders in the hands of those apemen. Since they won't give them up, we'll make them. Otherwise, none of us will be safe next time.'
'I see that you've adopted the popular opinions, anyway.'
'The opinions are my own. If they're popular opinion also, it's because they make sense. Earth wants a war. Well, they'll get it.'
'But why do they want a war, eh? Why do they force our hands? Our entire economic policy of the past months was only intended to force a change in their attitude without war.'
He was talking to himself, but his son answered with the final argument: 'I don't care why they wanted war. They've got it now, and we're going to smash them.'
Maynard returned to the Gathering, but even as the drone of debate re-filled the room, he thought, with a twinge, that there would be no Terrestrian alfalfa that year. He regretted the milk. In fact, even the beef seemed, somehow, to be just a little less savory -
The vote came in the early hours of the morning. Aurora declared war. Most of the worlds of the Aurora bloc joined it by dawn.
In the history books, the war was later known as the Three Weeks' War. In the first week, Auroran forces occupied several of the trans-Plutonian asteroids, and at the beginning of the third week, the bulk of Earth's home fleet was all but completely destroyed in a battle within the orbit of Saturn by an Aurora fleet not one-quarter its size, numerically.
Declarations of war from the Outer Worlds yet neutral followed like the pop-pop of a string of firecrackers.
On the twenty-first day of the war, lacking two hours, Earth surrendered.
The negotiations of peace terms took place among the Outer Worlds. Earth's activities were concerned with signing only. The conditions of peace were unusual, perhaps unique, and under the force of an unprecedented humiliation, all the hordes of Earth seemed suddenly struck with a silence that came from a shamed anger too strong for words.
The terms mentioned were perhaps best commented upon by a voice on the Auroran video two days after they were made public. It can be quoted in part:
'Ö There is nothing in or on Earth that we of the Outer Worlds can need or want. All that was ever worthwhile on Earth left it centuries ago in the persons of our ancestors.
'They call us the children of Mother Earth, but that is not so, for we are the descendants of a Mother Earth that no longer exists, a Mother that we brought with us. The Earth of today bears us at best a cousinly relation. No more.
'Do we want their resources? Why, they have none for themselves. Can we use their industry or science? They are almost dead for lack of ours. Can we use their man power? Ten of them are not worth a single robot. Do we even want the dubious glory of ruling them? There is no such glory. As our helpless and incompetent inferiors, they would be only a drag upon us. They would divert from our own use food, labor and administrative ability.
'So they have nothing to give us but the space they occupy in our thought. They have nothing to free us from but themselves. They cannot benefit us in any way other than in their absence.
'It is for that reason that the peace terms have been defined as they have been. We wish them no harm, so let them have their own solar system. Let them live there in peace. Let them mold their own destiny in their own way, and we will not disturb them there by even the least hint of our presence. But we in turn want peace. We in turn would guide our own future in our own way. So we do not want their presence. And with that end in view, an Outer World fleet will patrol the boundaries of their system, Outer World bases will be established on their outermost asteroids, so that we may make sure they do not intrude on our territory.
'There will be no trade, no diplomatic relationships, no travel, no communications. They are fenced off, locked out, hermetically sealed away. Out here we have a new universe, a second creation of Man, a higher Man -
They ask us: What will become of Earth? We answer: That is Earth's problem. Population growth can be controlled. Resources can be efficiently exploited. Economic systems can be revised. We know, for we have done so. If they cannot, let them go the way of the dinosaur, and make room.
'Let them make room, instead of forever demanding room!'
And so an impenetrable curtain swung slowly shut about the Solar System. The stars in Earth's sky became only stars again, as in the long-dead days before the first ship had penetrated the barrier of light's speed.
The government that had made war and peace resigned, but there was no one, really, to take their place. The legislature elected Luiz Moreno - ex-Ambassador to Aurora, ex-Secretary without Portfolio - as President pro tem, and the Earth as a whole was too numbed to agree or disagree. There was only a widespread relief that someone existed who would be willing to take the job of trying to guide the destinies of a world in prison.
Very few realized how well-planned an ending this was, or with what calculation Moreno found himself in the president's chair.
Ernest Keilin said hopelessly from the video screen: 'We are only ourselves now. For us, there is no universe and no past - only Earth, and the future.'
That night he heard from Luiz Moreno once again, and before morning he left for the capital.
Moreno 's presence seemed incongruent within the stiffly formal president's mansion. He was suffering from a cold again, and snuffled when he talked.
Keilin regarded him with a self-terrifying hostility; an almost singeing hatred in which he could feel his fingers begin to twitch in the first gestures of choking. Perhaps he shouldn't have come- Well, what was the difference; the orders had been plain. If he had not come, he would have been brought.
The new president looked at him sharply: 'You have to alter your attitude toward me, Keilin, I know you regard me as one of the Gravediggers of Earth - isn't that the phrase you used last night? - but you must listen to me quietly for a while. In your present state of suppressed rage, I doubt if you could hear me.'
'I will hear whatever you have to say, Mr. President.'
'Well - the external amenities, at least. That's hopeful. Or do you think a video-tracer is attached to the room?'
Keilin merely lifted his eyebrows.
Moreno said: 'It isn't. We are quite alone. We must be alone; otherwise, how could I tell you safely that it is being arranged for you to be elected president under a constitution now being devised? Eh, what's the matter?'
Then he grinned at the look of bloodless amazement in Kei-lin's face. 'Oh, you don't believe it. Well, it's past your stopping. And before an hour is up, you'll understand.'
'I'm to be president?' Keilia struggled with a strange, hoarse voice. Then, more firmly: 'You are mad.'
'No. Not I. Those out there, rather. Out there in the Outer Worlds.' There was a sudden vicious intensity in Moreno 's eyes, and face, and voice, so that you forgot he was a little monkey of a man with a perpetual cold. You didn't notice the wrinkled, sloping forehead. You forgot the baldish head and ill-fitting clothes. There was only the bright and luminous look in his eyes, and the hard incision in his voice. That you noticed.
Keilin reached blindly backward for a chair, as Moreno came closer and spoke with increasing intensity.
'Yes,' said Moreno. 'Those out among the Stars. The godlike ones. The stately supermen. The strong, handsome master-race. They are mad. But only we on Earth know it.
'Come, you have heard of the Pacific Project. I know you have. You denounced it to Cellioni once, and called it a fake. But it isn't a fake. And almost none of it is a secret. In fact, the only secret about it was that almost none of it was a secret.
'You're no fool, Keilin. You just never stopped to work it all out. And yet you were on the track. You had the feel of it. What was it you said that time you were interviewing me on the program? Something about the attitude of the Outer Worldling toward the Earthman being the only flaw in the former's stability. That was it, wasn't it? Or something like that? Very well, then; good! You had the first third of the Pacific Project in your mind at the time, and it was no secret after all, was it?
'Ask yourself, Keilin - what was the attitude of the typical Auroran to a typical Earthman? A feeling of superiority? That's the first thought, I suppose. But, tell me, Keih'n, if he really felt superior, really superior, would it be so necessary for him to call such continuous attention to it? What kind of superiority is it that must be continuously bolstered by the constant repetition of phrases such as "apemen," "submen," "half-animals of Earth," and so on? That is not the calm internal assurance of superiority. Do you waste epithets on earthworms? No, there is something else there.
'Or let us approach it from another tack. Why do Outer World tourists stay in special hotels, travel in inclosed ground-cars, and have rigid, if unwritten, rules against social intermingling? Are they afraid of pollution? Strange, then, that they are not afraid to eat our food and drink our wine and smoke our tobacco.
'You see, Keilin, there are no psychiatrists on the Outer Worlds. The supermen are, so they say, too well adjusted. But here on Earth, as the proverb goes, there are more psychiatrists than plumbers, and they get lots of practice. So it is we, and not they, who know the truth about this Outer World superiority-complex, who know it to be simply a wild reaction against an overwhelming feeling of guilt.
'Don't you think that can be so? You shake your head as though you disagree. You don't see that a handful of men who clutch a Galaxy while billions starve for lack of room must feel a subconscious guilt, no matter what? And, since they won't share the loot, don't you see that the only way they can justify themselves is to try to convince themselves that Earth-men, after all, are inferior, that they do not deserve the Galaxy, that a new race of men have been created out there and that we here are only the diseased remnants of an old race that should die out like the dinosaur, through the working of inexorable natural laws?
'Ah, if they could only convince themselves of that, they would no longer be guilty, but merely superior. Only, it doesn't work; it never does. It requires constant bolstering; constant repetition, constant reinforcement. And still it doesn't quite convince.
'Best of all, if only they could pretend that Earth and its population do not exist at all. When you visit Earth, therefore, avoid Earthmen; or they might make you uncomfortable by not looking inferior enough. Sometimes they might look miserable instead, and nothing more. Or worse still, they might even seem intelligent - as I did, for instance, on Aurora.
'Occasionally, an Outer Worlder like Moreanu did crop up, and was able to recognize guilt for what it was without being afraid to say so out loud. He spoke of the duty the Outer Worlds owed Earth - and so he was dangerous to us. For if the others listened to him and had offered token assistance to Earth, their guilt might have been assuaged in their own minds; and that without any lasting help to Earth. So Moreanu was removed through our web-weaving, and the way left clear to those who were unbending, who refused to admit guilt, and whose reaction could therefore be predicted and manipulated.
'Send them an arrogant note, for instance, and they automatically strike back with a useless embargo that merely gives us the ideal pretext for war. Then lose a war quickly, and you are sealed off by the annoyed supermen. No communication, no contact. You no longer exist to annoy them. Isn't that simple? Didn't it work out nicely?'
Keilin finally found his voice, because Moreno gave him time by stopping. Hd said: 'You mean that all thjs was planned? You did deliberately instigate the war for the purpose of sealing Earth off from the Galaxy? You sent out the men of the Home Fleet to sure death because you wanted defeat? Why, you're a monster, aÖ a -'
Moreno frowned: 'Please relax. It was not as simple as you think, and I am not a monster. Do you think the war could simply be - instigated? It had to be nurtured gently in just the right way and to just the right conclusion. If we had made the first move, if we had been the aggressor, if we had in any way put the fault on our side - why, they of the Outer Worlds would have occupied Earth and ground it under. They would no longer feel guilty, you see, if we committed a crime against them. Or, again, if we fought a protracted war, or one in which we inflicted damage, they could succeed in shifting the blame.
'But we didn't. We merely imprisoned Auroran smugglers, and were obviously within our rights. They had to go to war over it because only so could they protect their superiority, which in turn protected them against the horrors of guilt. And we lost quickly. Scarcely an Auroran died. The guilt grew deeper and resulted in exactly the peace treaty our psychiatrists had predicted.
'And as for sending men out to die, that is a commonplace in every war - and a necessity. It was necessary to fight a battle, and, naturally, there were casualties.'
'But why?' interrupted Keilin, wildly. 'Why? Why? Why does all this gibberish seem to make sense to you? What have we gained? What can we possibly gain out of the present situation?'
'Gained, man? You ask what we've gained? Why, we've gained the universe. What has held us back so far? You know what Earth has needed these last centuries. You yourself once outlined it forcefully to Cellioni. We need a positronic robot society and an atomic power technology. We need chemical farming and we need population control. Well, what's prevented that, eh? Only the customs of centuries which said robots were evil since they deprived human beings of jobs, that population control was merely the murder of unborn children, and so on. And worse, there was always the safety valve of emigration either actual or hoped-for.
'But now we cannot emigrate. We're stuck here. Worse than that, we have been humiliatingly defeated by a handful of men out in the stars, and we've had a humiliating treaty of peace forced upon us. What Earthman wouldn't subconsciously burn for revenge? Self-preservation has frequently knuckled under to that tremendous yearning to "get even."
'And that is the second third of the Pacific Project, the recognition of the revenge motive. As simple as that.
'And how can we know that this is really so? Why, it has been demonstrated in history scores of times. Defeat a nation, but don't crush it entirely, and in a generation or two or three it will be stronger than it was before. Why? Because in the interval, sacrifices will have been made for revenge that would not have been made for mere conquest.
'Think! Rome beat Carthage rather easily the first time, but was almost defeated the second. Every time Napoleon defeated the Europen coalition, he laid the groundwork for another just a little bit harder to defeat, until he himself was crushed by the eighth. It took four years to defeat Wilhelm of medieval Germany, and six much more dangerous years to stop his successor, Hitler.
'There you are! Until now, Earth needed to change its way of life only for greater comfort and happiness. A minor item like that could always wait. But now it must change for revenge, and that will not wait. And I want that change for its own sake.
'Only - I am not the man to lead. I am tarred with the failure of yesteryear, and will remain so until, long after I am bone-dust, Earth learns the truth. But youÖ you, and others like you, have always fought for the road to modernization. You will be in charge. It may take a hundred years. Grandchildren of men unborn may be the first to see its completion. But at least you will see the start.
'Eh, what do you say?'
Keilin was fumbling at the dream. He seemed to see it in a misty distance - a new and reborn Earth. But the change in attitude was too extreme. It could not be done just yet, He shook his head.
He said: 'What makes you think the Outer Worlds would allow such a change, supposing what you say to be true? They will be watching, I am sure, and they will detect a growing danger and put a stop to it. Can you deny that?'
Moreno threw his head back and laughed noiselessly. He gasped out: 'But we have still a third left of the Pacific Project, a last, subtle and ironic third -
'The Outer Worlders call the men of Earth the subhuman dregs of a great race, but we are the men of Earth. Do you realize what that means? We live on a planet upon which, for a billion years, life - the life that has culminated in Mankind -has been adapting itself. There is not a microscopic part of Man, not a tiny working of his mind, that has not as its reason some tiny facet of the physical make-up of Earth, or of the biological make-up of Earth's other life-forms, or of the sociological make-up of the society about him.
'No other planet can substitute for Earth, in Man's present shape.
'The Outer Worlders exist as they do, only because pieces of Earth have been transplanted. Soil has been brought out there; plants; animals; men. They keep themselves surrounded by an artificial Earth-born geology which has within it, for instance, those traces of cobalt, zinc and copper which human chemistry must have. They surround thmselves by Earth-born bacteria and algae which have the ability to make those inorganic traces available in just the right way and in just the right quantity.
'And they maintain that situation by continued imports -luxury imports, they call it - from Earth.
'But on the Outer Worlds, even with Terrestrian soil laid down to bedrock, they cannot keep rain from falling and rivers from flowing, so that there is an inevitable, if slow, admixture with the native soil; an inevitable contamination of Terrestrian soil bacteria with the native bacteria, and an exposure, in any case, to a different atmosphere and to solar radiations of different types. Terrestrian bacteria disappear or change. And then plant life changes. And then animal life.
'No great change, mind you. Plant life would not become poisonous or nonnutritious in a day, or year, or decade. But already, the men of the Outer Worlds can detect the loss or change of the trace compounds that are responsible for that infinitely elusive thing we call "flavor." It has gone that far.
'And it will go further. Do you know, for instance, that on Aurora, nearly one half the native bacterial species known have protoplasm based on the fluorocarbon rather than hydrocarbon chemistry? Can you imagine the essential foreignness of such an environment?
'Well, for two decades now, the bacteriologists and physiologists of Earth have studied various forms of Outer World life - the only portion of the Pacific Project that has been truly secret - and the transplanted Terrestrian life is akeady beginning to show certain changes on the subcellular level. Even among the humans,
'And here is the irony. The Outer Worlders, by their rigid racism and unbending genetic policies are consistently eliminating from among themselves any children that show signs of adapting themselves to their respective planets in any way that departs from the norm. They are maintaining - they must maintain as a result of their own thought-processes - an artificial criterion of "healthy" humanity, which is based on Terrestrian chemistry and not their own.
'But now that Earth has been cut off from them; now that not even a trickle of Terrestrian soil and life will reach them, change will be piled on change. Sicknesses will come, mortality will increase, child abnormalities will become more frequent -'
'And then?' asked Keilin, suddenly caught up.
'And then? Well, they are physical scientists - leaving such inferior sciences as biology to us. And they cannot abandon their sensation of superiority and their arbitrary standard of human perfection. They will never detect the change till it is too late to fight it. Not all mutations are clearly visible, and there will be an increasing revolt against the mores of those stiff Outer World societies. There will be a century of increasing physical and social turmoil which will prevent any interference on their part with us.
'We will have a century of rebuilding and revitalization, and at the end of it, we shall face an outer Galaxy which will either be dying or changed. In the first case, we will build a second Terrestrian Empire, more wisely and with greater knowledge than we did the first; one based on a strong and modernized Earth.
'In the second case, we will face perhaps ten, twenty, or even all fifty Outer Worlds, each with a slightly different variety of Man. Fifty humanoid species, no longer united against us, each increasingly adapted to its own planet, each with a sufficient tendency toward atavism to love Earth, to regard it as the great and original Mother.
'And racism will be dead, for variety will then be the great fact of Humanity, and not uniformity. Each type of Man will have a world of its own, for which no other world could quite substitute, and on which no other type could live quite as well. And other worlds can be settled to breed still newer varieties, until out of the grand intellectual mixture, Mother Earth will finally have given birth not to merely a Terrestrian, but to a Galactic Empire.'
Keilin said, fascinated, 'You foresee all this so certainly.'
'Nothing is truly certain; but the best minds on Earth agree on this. There may be unforeseen stumbling blocks on the way, but to remove those will be the adventure of our great-grandchildren. Of our adventure, one phase has been successfully concluded; and another phase is beginning. Join us, Keilin.'
Slowly, Keilin began to think that perhaps Moreno was not a monster after all -



***



What interests me roost about 'Mother Earth' is that it seems to show clear premonitions of the novels Caves of Steel and The Naked Sun, which I was to write in the 1950s.
One thing about the story that I can't explain is the fact that I have two characters in it, one of whom is named Moreno and one Moreanu. I haven't the slightest idea why I used such similiar names. There was no significance in it, I assure you, only carelessness. There was also a Maynard.
Somehow, in reading and rereading the manuscript, the sloppiness of the situation never struck me. It did, however, just as soon as I saw the story in print. Why Campbell didn't notice and make me change the names, I haven't the faintest idea.
I had no sooner sold 'Mother Earth' than I began a new 'Foundation' story entitled 'Ö And Now You Don't.' It was to be the last. Like The Mule,' it was fifty thousand words long, and I didn't finish it till March 29, 1949. I submitted it to Campbell the next day and he took it at once. At two cents a word, it netted me a check for one thousand dollars, the first four-figure check I ever received.
It appeared as a three-part serial in the November 1949, December 1949 and January 1950 issues of Astounding, and it made up the final two thirds of my book Second Foundation.
By then, though, a great change was coming over the field of science fiction. The atom bomb had altered science fiction from a disregarded field of crazy stories into a literature of dreadful perception. Slowly, it was mounting in readership and esteem. New magazines were about to come into being, and the large publishing houses were about to consider putting out regular lines of hardback science fiction novels (hitherto the domain of small specialty houses no more affluent than the magazines and no more hopeful as a source of income).
The matter of hardback novels was of particular interest to Doubleday amp; Company, Inc. (though, of course, I didn't know it at the time). On February 5, 1949, while I was working on the last of the 'Foundation' stories, I attended a meeting of the Hydra Club - a group of science fiction professionals who lived in New York. There I met a Doubleday editor, Walter I. Bradbury, for the first time. It was he who was trying to build up a science fiction line for Doubleday, and he expressed some interest in The Mule.'
I paid little attention to this, however. The thought of publishing a book, a real book, as opposed to magazine stories, was so outlandish that I simply couldn't cram it into my head.
But Fred Pohl could. He had been in the Army, serving in Italy and rising to the rank of sergeant. After discharge, he became an agent again. I had indignantly told him the story of Merwin's rejection of 'Grow Old with Me,' so when Bradbury continued searching, Pohl suggested to him that he look at that story of mine.
Bradbury was interested and, after considerable trouble, Pohl managed to pry the story out of me. ('It's no good,' I kept saying - having never really recovered from the double rejection.)
But on March 24, 1949, I received the word that Bradbury wanted 'Grow Old with Me' if I would expand it to seventy thousand words. What's more, he paid me a $250 option, which I could keep even if the revision was unsatisfactory. That was the first time anyone had paid me anything in advance, and I was flabbergasted.
On April 6, I began the revision, and on May 25, 1949, I finished it and retitled it Pebble in the Sky. On May 29, Doubleday accepted it, and I had to grasp the fact that I was going to have a book published.
But even as I struggled with that, another change was taking place simultaneously.
There was still the matter of a job. All the time I was working for Professor Elderfleld, I was still searching for one that I could take after that temporary position reached its natural end in May 1949. I was having no success at all.
But then, on January 13, 1949, Professor William C. Boyd of Boston University School of Medicine was visiting New York, and we met.
Professor Boyd was a science fiction reader of long standing and had liked my stories. For a couple of years we had been corresponding and we had grown quite friendly. Now he told me that there was an opening in the biochemistry department at his school and would I be interested? I was interested, of course, but Boston is twice as far from New York as Philadelphia is, and I hated to leave New York again.
I refused the offer, but not very hard.
And I continued to look for a job, and I continued to fail.
I therefore reconsidered my refusal of the position at Boston University School of Medicine and wrote a letter to Professor Boyd, saying that perhaps I might be interested, after all.
On March 9, 1949, I traveled to Boston for the first time in my life (on a sleeper - but I didn't sleep). I met Professor Burnham S. Walker, head of the department of biochemistry, the next day and he offered me a position on the faculty at five thousand per year. I saw no way out of my jobless dilemma but to accept.
Did I have to? Was there no chance that I might have made my living as a writer?
How could I honestly come to a decision that I could? In mid-1949, I had been writing for exactly eleven years. In all that time, my total earnings had come to $7,821.75, averaging a little over $710 per year, or $13.70 per week. In my better years, such as the seventh (mid-1944 to mid-1945, when I had sold four stories, including 'The Mule'), I had earned $1,600, and in the tenth and eleventh together I had earned $3,300. It looked as though, even in good years, I could not count on much more than thirty dollars per week, and that just wasn't enough.
Of course, now that I was going to be publishing a book - But books were unknown quantities. Besides, the book sale had come too late. By the time Bradbury accepted Pebble in the Sky, I was committed to the new job, and two days later, on June 1, 1949, I left for Boston.
It is at this point I must come to a halt, for the multiple changes put a final end to the first stage of my writing career.
I had left Campbell, this time forever. Oh, I saw him occasionally, and we corresponded, but the steady drizzle of near-weekly visits was never to take place again. Though I wrote for him and continued to publish in Astounding, new magazines appeared, including The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction in 1949, Galaxy Science Fiction in 1950, and others. My market broadened, and the word rate went up still further, to three cents and even four cents a word.
The appearance of my first book, Pebble in the Sky, on January 19, 1950, introduced a new dimension to my self-image, to my prestige in the field and to my earnings. Other books followed - some new novels, some collections of older stories.
My position at Boston University School of Medicine led me to publish non-fiction. The first attempt was a textbook for medical students called Biochemistry and Human Metabolism. This was begun in 1950 in collaboration with Professors Walker and Boyd. It went through three editions and, though rather a failure, allowed me to discover that I enjoyed non-fiction writing at least as much as fiction writing and helped me start on a new phase of my writing career.
With all this taken into account, it is not surprising that my earnings as a writer began to rise rapidly almost as soon as I came to Boston. By 1952 I was making considerably more money as a writer than as a professor, and the discrepancy grew larger - in favor of writing - each succeeding year. By 1957, I'd decided (still somewhat to my surprise) that I had been a writer all along and that that was all I was.
On July 1, 1958,1 gave up my salary and my duties but, with the agreement of the school, kept my title, which was then Associate Professor of Biochemistry. I keep that title to this day. I give an occasional lecture at the school when asked to do so, and I also lecture elsewhere when asked to do so (and charge a fee). For the rest, I became a full-time free-lance writer.
Writing is easy now, and is ever more satisfying. I keep what amounts to a seventy-hour week, if you count all the ancillary jobs of proofreading, indexing, research and so on. I average seven or eight books a year, and this book, The Early Asimov, is my 125th book.
And yet, I must admit there has never been, since 1949, anything like the real excitement of those first eleven 'Campbell years,' when I wrote only in my spare time, and sometimes not even then, when every submission meant unbearable suspense, when every rejection meant misery and every acceptance ecstasy, and every fifty-dollar check was the wealth of Croesus.
And on July 11, 1971, John Campbell, at the still-early age of sixty-one, while watching television, died at 7.30 p.m. quietly and peacefully, without any pain at all.
There is no way at all to express how much he meant to me and how much he did for me except, perhaps, to write these books evoking, once more, those days of a quarter century ago.





[1] The last story in The Early Asimov: Volume 2.




[2] The Unknown 5, edited by D. R. Bensen Copyright © 1964 by Isaac Asimov




[3] Astounding Science Fiction, November 1943, Copyright © 1943 by Street and Smith Publications, Inc., Copyright renewed © 1970 by Isaac Asimov




[4] Astounding Science Fiction, March 1945, Copyright © 1945 by Street and Smith Publications, Inc.




[5] Astounding Science Fiction, June 1948, Copyright © 1948 by Street amp; Smith Publications, Inc.




[6] The Endochronometer - First attempts to measure the time, Astounding Science Fiction, March 1948, Copyright © 1948 by Street amp; Smith Publications, Inc.




[7] This was inspired by Robert Browning's poem Rabbi Ben Ezra and was a misquotation - which shows you the level of my culture. The first line of the poem is 'Grow old along with me.'




Isaac Asimov


The End of Eternity






1. Technician


Andrew Harlan stepped into the kettle. Its sides were perfectly round and it fit snugly inside a vertical shaft composed of widely spaced rods that shimmered into an unseeable haze six feet above Harlan's head. Harlan set the controls and moved the smoothly working starting lever.
The kettle did not move.
Harlan did not expect it to. He expected no movement; neither up nor down, left nor right, forth nor back. Yet the spaces between the rods had melted into a gray blankness which was solid to the touch, though nonetheless immaterial for all that. And there was the little stir in his stomach, the faint (psychosomatic?) touch of dizziness, that told him that all the kettle contained, including himself, was rushing upwhen through Eternity.
He had boarded the kettle in the 575th Century, the base of operations assigned him two years earlier. At the time the 575th had been the farthest upwhen he had ever traveled. Now he was moving upwhen to the 2456th Century.
Under ordinary circumstances he might have felt a little lost at the prospect. His native Century was in the far downwhen, the 95th Century, to be exact. The 95th was a Century stiffly restrictive of atomic power, faintly rustic, fond of natural wood as a structural material, exporters of certain types of distilled potables to nearly everywhen and importers of clover seed. Although Harlan had not been in the 95th since he entered special training and became a Cub at the age of fifteen, there was always that feeling of loss when one moved outwhen from "home." At the 2456th he would be nearly two hundred forty millennia from his birthwhen and that is a sizable distance even for a hardened Eternal.
Under ordinary circumstances all this would be so.
But right now Harlan was in poor mood to think of anything but the fact that his documents were heavy in his pocket and his plan heavy on his heart. He was a little frightened, a little tense, a little confused.
It was his hands acting by themselves that brought the kettle to the proper halt at the proper Century.
Strange that a Technician should feel tense or nervous about anything. What was it that Educator Yarrow had once said:
"Above all, a Technician must be dispassionate. The Reality Change he initiates may affect the lives of as many as fifty billion people. A million or more of these may be so drastically affected as to be considered new individuals. Under these conditions, an emotional make-up is a distinct handicap."
Harlan put the memory of his teacher's dry voice out of his mind with an almost savage shake of his head. In those days he had never imagined that he himself would have the peculiar talent for that very position. But emotion had come upon him after all. Not for fifty billion people. What in Time did he care for fifty billion people? There was just one. One person.
He became aware that the kettle was stationary and with the merest pause to pull his thoughts together, put himself into the cold, impersonal frame of mind a Technician must have, he stepped out. The kettle he left, of course, was not the same as the one he had boarded, in the sense that it was not composed of the same atoms. He did not worry about that any more than any Eternal would. To concern oneself with the mystique of Time-travel, rather than with the simple fact of it, was the mark of the Cub and newcomer to Eternity.
He paused again at the infinitely thin curtain of non-Space and nonTime which separated him from Eternity in one way and from ordinary Time in another.
This would be a completely new section of Eternity for him. He knew about it in a rough way, of course, having checked upon it in the _Temporal Handbook_. Still, there was no substitute for actual appearance and he steeled himself for the initial shock of adjustment.
He adjusted the controls, a simple matter in passing into Eternity (and a very complicated one in passing into Time, a type of passage which was correspondingly less frequent). He stepped through the curtain and found himself squinting at the brilliance. Automatically he threw up his hand to shield his eyes.
Only one man faced him. At first Harlan could see him only blurrily.
The man said, "I am Sociologist Kantor Voy. I imagine you are Technician Harlan."
Harlan nodded and said, "Father Time! Isn't this sort of ornamentation adjustable?"
Voy looked about and said tolerantly, "You mean the molecular films?"
"I certainly do," said Harlan. The Handbook had mentioned them, but had said nothing of such an insane riot of light reflection.
Harlan felt his annoyance to be quite reasonable. The 2456th Century was matter-oriented, as most Centuries were, so he had a right to expect a basic compatibility from the very beginning. It would have none of the utter confusion (for anyone born matter-oriented) of the energy vortices of the 300's, or the field dynamics of the 600's. In the 2456th, to the average Eternal's comfort, matter was used for everything from walls to tacks.
To be sure, there was matter and matter. A member of an energyoriented Century might not realize that. To him all matter might seem minor variations on a theme that was gross, heavy, and barbaric. To matter-oriented Harlan, however, there was wood, metal (subdivisions, heavy and light), plastic, silicates, concrete, leather, and so on.
But matter consisting entirely of mirrors!
That was his first impression of the 2456th. Every surface reflected and glinted light. Everywhere was the illusion of complete smoothness; the effect of a molecular film. And in the ever-repeated reflection of himself, of Sociologist Voy, of everything he could see, in scraps and wholes, in all angles, there was confusion. Garish confusion and nausea!
"I'm sorry," said Voy, "it's the custom of the Century, and the Section assigned to it finds it good practice to adopt the customs where practical. You get used to it after a time."
Voy walked rapidly upon the moving feet of another Voy, upside down beneath the floor, who matched him stride for stride. He reached to move a hair-contact indicator down a spiral scale to point of origin.
The reflections died; extraneous light faded. Harlan felt his world settle.
"If you'll come with me now," said Voy.
Harlan followed through empty corridors that, Harlan knew, must moments ago have been a riot of made light and reflection, up a ramp, through an anteroom, into an office.
In all the short journey no human being had been visible. Harlan was so used to that, took it so for granted, that he would have been surprised, almost shocked, if a glimpse of a human figure hurrying away had caught his eyes. No doubt the news had spread that a Technician was coming through. Even Voy kept his distance and when, accidentally, Harlan's hand had brushed Voy's sleeve, Voy shrank away with a visible start.
Harlan was faintly surprised at the touch of bitterness he felt at all this. He had thought the shell he had grown about his soul was thicker, more efficiently insensitive than that. If he was wrong, if his shell had worn thinner, there could only be one reason for that.
Noys!


Sociologist Kantor Voy leaned forward toward the Technician in what seemed a friendly enough fashion, but Harlan noted automatically that they were seated on opposite sides of the long axis of a fairly large table.
Voy said, "I am pleased to have a Technician of your reputation interest himself in our little problem here."
"Yes," said Harlan with the cold impersonality people would expect of him. "It has its points of interest." (Was he impersonal enough? Surely his real motives must be apparent, his guilt be spelled out in beads of sweat on his forehead.)
He removed from an inner pocket the foiled summary of the projected Reality Change. It was the very copy which had been sent to the Allwhen Council a month earlier. Through his relationship with Senior Computer Twissell (the Twissell, himself) Harlan had had little trouble in getting his hands on it.
Before unrolling the foil, letting it peel off onto the table top where it would be held by a soft paramagnetic field, Harlan paused a split moment.
The molecular film that covered the table was subdued but was not zero. The motion of his arm fixed his eye and for an instant the reflection of his own face seemed to stare somberly up at him from the table top. He was thirty-two, but he looked older. He needed no one to tell him that. It might be partly his long face and dark eyebrows over darker eyes that gave him the lowering expression and cold glare associated with the caricature of the Technician in the minds of all Eternals. It might be just his own realization that he was a Technician.
But then he flicked the foil out across the table and turned to the matter at hand.
"I am not a Sociologist, sir."
Voy smiled. "That sounds formidable. When one begins by expressing lack of competence in a given field, it usually implies that a flat opinion in that field will follow almost immediately."
"No," said Harlan, "not an opinion. Just a request. I wonder if you won't look over this summary and see if you haven't made a small mistake somewhere here."
Voy looked instantly grave. "I hope not," he said.
Harlan kept one arm across the back of his chair, the other in his lap. He must let neither hand drum restless fingers. He must not bite his lips. He must not show his feelings in any way.
Ever since the whole orientation of his life had so changed itself, he had been watching the summaries of projected Reality Changes as they passed through the grinding administrative gears of the Allwhen Council. As Senior Computer Twissell's personally assigned Technician, he could arrange that by a slight bending of professional ethics. Particularly with Twissell's attention caught ever more tightly in his own overwhelming project. (Harlan's nostrils flared. He knew now a little of the nature of that project.)
Harlan had had no assurance that he would ever find what he was looking for in a reasonable time. When he had first glanced over projected Reality Change 2456-2781, Serial Number V-5, he was half inclined to believe his reasoning powers were warped by wishing. For a full day he had checked and rechecked equations and relationships in a rattling uncertainty, mixed with growing excitement and a bitter gratitude that he had been taught at least elementary psycho-mathematics.
Now Voy went over those same puncture patterns with a half-puzzled, half-worried eye.
He said, "It seems to me; I say, it seems to me that this is all perfectly in order."
Harlan said, "I refer you particularly to the matter of the courtship characteristics of the society of the current Reality of this Century. That's sociology and your responsibility, I believe. It's why I arranged to see you when I arrived, rather than someone else."
Voy was now frowning. He was still polite, but with an icy touch now. He said, "The Observers assigned to our Section are highly competent. I have every certainty that those assigned to this project have given accurate data. Have you evidence to the contrary?"
"Not at all, Sociologist Voy. I accept their data. It is the development of the data I question. Do you not have an alternate tensorcomplex at this point, if the courtship data is taken properly into consideration?"
Voy stared, and then a look of relief washed over him visibly. "Of course, Technician, of course, but it resolves itself into an identity. There is a loop of small dimensions with no tributaries on either side. I hope you'll forgive me for using picturesque language rather than precise mathematical expressions."
"I appreciate it," said Harlan dryly. "I am no more a Computer than a Sociologist."
"Very good, then. The alternate tensor-complex you refer to, or the forking of the road, as we might say, is non-significant. The forks join up again and it is a single road. There was not even any need to mention it in our recommendations."
"If you say so, sir, I will defer to your better judgment. However, there is still the matter of the M.N.C."
The Sociologist winced at the initials as Harlan knew he would. M.N.C.-Minitnum Necessary Change. There the Technician was master. A Sociologist might consider himself above criticism by lesser beings in anything involving the mathematical analysis of the infinite possible Realities in Time, but in matters of M.N.C. the Technician stood supreme.
Mechanical computing would not do. The largest Computaplex ever built, manned by the cleverest and most experienced Senior Computer ever born, could do no better than to indicate the ranges in which the M.N.C. might be found. It was then the Technician, glancing over the data, who decided on an exact point within that range. A good Technician was rarely wrong. A top Technician was never wrong.
Harlan was never wrong.
"Now the M.N.C. recommended," said Harlan (he spoke coolly, evenly, pronouncing the Standard Intertemporal Language in precise syllables), "by your Section involves induction of an accident in space and the immediate death by fairly horrible means of a dozen or more men."
"Unavoidable," said Voy, shrugging.
"On the other hand," said Harlan, "I suggest that the M.N.C. can be reduced to the mere displacement of a container from one shelf to another. Here!" His long finger pointed. His white, well-cared-for index nail made the faintest mark along one set of perforations.
Voy considered matters with a painful but silent intensity.
Harlan said, "Doesn't that alter the situation with regard to your unconsidered fork? Doesn't it take advantage of the fork of lesser probability, changing it to near-certainty, and does that not then lead to--"
"-to virtually the M.D.R." whispered Voy.
"To exactly the Maximum Desired Response," said Harlan.
Voy looked up, his dark face struggling somewhere between chagrin and anger. Harlan noted absently that there was a space between the man's large upper incisors which gave him a rabbity look quite at odds with the restrained force of his words.
Voy said, "I suppose I will be hearing from the Allwhen Council?"
"I don't think so. As far as I know, the Allwhen Council does not know of this. At least, the projected Reality Change was passed over to me without comment." He did not explain the word "passed," nor did Voy question it.
"You discovered this error, then?"
"Yes."
"And you did not report it to the Allwhen Council?"
"No, I did not."
Relief first, then a hardening of countenance. "Why not?"
"Very few people could have avoided this error. I felt I could correct it before damage was done. I have done so. Why go any further?"
"Well-thank you, Technician Harlan. You have been a friend. The Section's error which, as you say, was practically unavoidable, would have looked unjustifiably bad in the record."
He went on after a moment's pause. "Of course, in view of the alterations in personality to be induced by this Reality Change, the death of a few men as preliminary is of little importance."
Harlan thought, detachedly: He doesn't sound really grateful. He probably resents it. If he stops to think, he'll resent it even more, this being saved a downstroke in rating by a Technician. If I were a Sociologist, he would shake my hand, but he won't shake the hand of a Technician. He defends condemning a dozen people to asphyxiation, but he won't touch a Technician.
And because waiting to let resentment grow would be fatal, Harlan said without waiting, "I hope your gratitude will extend to having your Section perform a slight chore for me."
"A chore?"
"A matter of Life-Plotting. I have the data necessary here with me. I have also the data for a suggested Reality Change in the 482nd. I want to know the effect of the Change on the probability-pattern of a certain individual."
"I am not quite sure," said the Sociologist slowly, "that I understand you. Surely you have the facilities for doing this in your own Section?"
"I have. Nevertheless, what I am engaged in is a personal research which I don't wish to appear in the records just yet. It would be difficult to have this carried out in my own Section without--" He gestured an uncertain conclusion to the unfinished sentence.
Voy said, "Then you want this done not through official channels."
"I want it done confidentially. I want a confidential answer."
"Well, now, that's very irregular. I can't agree to it."
Harlan frowned. "No more irregular than my failure to report your error to the Allwhen Council. You raised no objection to that. If we're going to be strictly regular in one case, we must be as strict and as regular in the other. You follow me, I think?"
The look on Voy's face was proof positive of that. He held out his hand. "May I see the documents?"
Harlan relaxed a bit. The main hurdle had been passed. He watched eagerly as the Sociologist's head bent over the foils he had brought.
Only once did the Sociologist speak. "By Time, this is a small Reality Change."
Harlan seized his opportunity and improvised. "It is. Too small, I think. It's what the argument is about. It's below critical difference, and I've picked an individual as a test case. Naturally, it would be undiplomatic to use our own Section's facilities until I was certain of being right."
Voy was unresponsive and Harlan stopped. No use running this past the point of safety.
Voy stood up. "I'll pass this along to one of my Life-Plotters. We'll keep this private. You understand, though, that this is not to be taken as establishing a precedent."
"Of course not."
"And if you don't mind, I'd like to watch the Reality Change take place. I trust you will honor us by conducting the M.N.C. personally."
Harlan nodded. "I will take full responsibility."


Two of the screens in the viewing chamber were in operation when they entered. The engineers had focused them already to the exact co-ordinates in Space and Time and then had left. Harlan and Voy were alone in the glittering room. (The molecular film arrangement was perceptible and even a bit more than perceptible, but Harlan was looking at the screens.)
Both views were motionless. They might have been scenes of the dead, since they pictured mathematical instants of Time.
One view was in sharp, natural color; the engine room of what Harlan knew to be an experimental space-ship. A door was closing, and a glistening shoe of a red, semi-transparent material was just visible through the space that remained. It did not move. Nothing moved. If the picture could have been made sharp enough to picture the dust motes in the air, they would not have moved.
Voy said, "For two hours and thirty-six minutes after the viewed instant, that engine room will remain empty. In the current Reality, that is."
"I know," murmured Harlan. He was putting on his gloves and already his quick eyes were memorizing the position of the critical container on its shelf, measuring the steps to it, estimating the best position into which to transfer it. He cast one quick look at the other screen.
If the engine-room, being in the range described as "present" with respect to that Section of Eternity in which they now stood, was clear and in natural color, the other scene, being some twenty-five Centuries in the "future," carried the blue luster all views of the "future" must.
It was a space-port. A deep blue sky, blue-tinged buildings of naked metal on blue-green ground. A blue cylinder of odd design, bulgebottomed, stood in the foreground. Two others like it were in the background. All three pointed cleft noses upward, the cleavage biting deeply into the vitals of the ship.
Harlan frowned. "They're queer ones."
"Electro-gravitic," said Voy. "The 2481st is the only Century to develop electro-gravitic space-travel. No propellants, no nucleonics. It's an aesthetically pleasing device. It's a pity we must Change away from it. A pity." His eyes fixed themselves on Harlan with distinct disapproval.
Harlan's lips compressed. Disapproval of course! Why not? He was the Technician.
To be sure, it had been some Observer who had brought in the details of drug addiction. It had been some Statistician who had demonstrated that recent Changes had increased the addiction rate until now it was the highest in all the current Reality of man. Some Sociologist, probably Voy himself, had interpreted that into the psychiatric profile of a society. Finally, some Computer had worked out the Reality Change necessary to decrease addiction to a safe level and found that, as a side effect, electro-gravitic space-travel must suffer. A dozen, a hundred men of every rating in Eternity had had a hand in this.
But then, at the end, a Technician such as himself must step in. Following the directions all the others had combined to give him, he must be the one to initiate the actual Reality Change. And then all the others would stare in haughty accusation at him. Their stares would say: You, not we, have destroyed this beautiful thing.
And for that, they would condemn and avoid him. They would shift their own guilt to his shoulders and scorn him.
Harlan said harshly, "Ships aren't what count. We're concerned with those things."
The "things" were people, dwarfed by the space-ship, as Earth and Earth's society is always dwarfed by the physical dimensions of spaceflight.
They were little puppets in clusters, these people. Their tiny arms and legs were in raised, artificial-looking positions, caught in the frozen instant of Time.
Voy shrugged.
Harlan was adjusting the small field-generator about his left wrist. "Let's get this job done."
"One minute. I want to get in touch with the Life-Plotter and find out how long his job for you will take. I want to get that job done, too."
His hands worked cleverly at a little movable contact and his ear listened astutely to the pattern of clicks that came back. (Another characteristic of this Section of Eternity, thought Harlan-sound codes in clicks. Clever, but affected, like the molecular films.)
"He says it won't take more than three hours," said Voy at length. "Also, by the way, he admires the name of the person involved. Noys Lambent. It is a female, isn't it?"
There was a dryness in Harlan's throat. "Yes."
Voy's lips curled into a slow smile. "Sounds interesting. I'd like to meet her, sight unseen. Haven't had any women in this Section for months."
Harlan didn't trust himself to answer. He stared a moment at the Sociologist and turned abruptly.
If there was a flaw in Eternity, it involved women. He had known the flaw for what it was from almost his first entrance into Eternity, but he felt it personally only that day he had first met Noys. From that moment it had been an easy path to this one, in which he stood false to his oath as an Eternal and to everything in which he had believed.
For what?
For Noys.
And he was not ashamed. It was that which really rocked him. He was not ashamed. He felt no guilt for the crescendo of crimes he had committed, to which this latest addition of the unethical use of confidential Life-Plotting could rank only as a peccadillo.
He would do worse than his worst if he had to.
For the first time the specific and express thought came to him. And though he pushed it away in horror, he knew that, having once come, it would return.
The thought was simply this: That he would ruin Eternity, if he had to.
The worst of it was that he knew he had the power to do it.






2. Observer


Harlan stood at the gateway to Time and thought of himself in new ways. It had been very simple once. There were such things as ideals, or at least catchwords, to live by and for. Every stage of an Eternal's life had a reason. How did "Basic Principles" start?
"The life of an Eternal may be divided into four partsÖ"
It all worked out neatly, yet it had all changed for him, and what was broken could not be made whole again.
Yet he had gone faithfully through each of the four parts of an Eternal's life. First, there was the period of fifteen years in which he was not an Eternal at all, but only an inhabitant of Time. Only a human being out of Time, a Timer, could become an Eternal; no one could be born into the position.
At the age of fifteen he was chosen by a careful process of elimination and winnowing, the nature of which he had no conception.of at the time. He was taken beyond the veil of Eternity after a last agonized farewell to his family. (Even then it was made clear to him that whatever else happened he would never return. The true reason for that he was not to learn till long afterward.)
Once within Eternity, he spent ten years in school as a Cub, and then graduated to enter his third period as Observer. It was only after that that he became a Specialist and a true Eternal. The fourth and last part of the Eternal's life: Timer, Cub, Observer and Specialist.
He, Harlan, had gone through it all so neatly. He might say, successfully.
He could remember, so clearly, the moment that Cubhood was done, the moment they became independent members of Eternity, the moment when, even though un-Specialized, they still rated the legal title of "Eternal."
He could remember it. School done, Cubhood over, he was standing with the five who completed training with him, hands clasped in the small of his back, legs a trifle apart, eyes front, listening.
Educator Yarrow was at a desk talking to them. Harlan could remember Yarrow well: a small, intense man, with ruddy hair in disarray, freckled forearms, and a look of loss in his eyes. (It wasn't uncommon, this look of loss in the eyes of an Eternal-the loss of home and roots, the unadmitted and unadmittable longing for the one Century he could never see.)
Harlan could not remember Yarrow's exact words, of course, but the substance of it remained sharp.
Yarrow said, in substance, "You will be Observers now. It isn't a highly regarded position. Specialists look upon it as a boy's job. Maybe you Eternals" (he deliberately paused after that word to give each man a chance to straighten his back and brighten at the glory of it) "think so too. If so, you are fools who don't deserve to be Observers.
"The Computers would have no Computing to do, Life-Plotters no lives to Plot, Sociologists no societies to profile; none of the Specialists would have anything to do, if it weren't for the Observer. I know you've heard this said before, but I want you to be very firm and clear in your mind about it.
"It will be you youngsters who will go out into Time, under the most strenuous conditions, to bring back facts. Cold, objective facts uncolored by your own opinions and likings, you understand. Facts accurate enough to be fed into Computing machines. Facts definite enough to make the social equations stand up. Facts honest enough to form a basis for Reality Changes.
"And remember this, too. Your period as Observer is not something to get through with as quickly and as unobtrusively as possible. It is as an Observer that you will make your mark. Not what you did in school, but what you will do as an Observer will determine your Specialty and how high you will rise in it. This will be your post-graduate course, Eternals, and failure in it, even small failure, will put you into Maintenance no matter how brilliant your potentialities now seem. That is all."
He shook hands with each of them, and Harlan, grave, dedicated, proud in his belief that the privileges of being an Eternal contained its greatest privilege in the assumption of responsibility for the happiness of all the human beings who were or ever would be within the reach of Eternity, was deep in self-awe.
Harlan's first assignments were small and under close direction, but he sharpened his ability on the honing strap of experience in a dozen Centuries through a dozen Reality Changes.
In his fifth year as Observer he was given a Senior's rating in the field and assigned to the 482nd. For the first time he would be working unsupervised, and knowledge of that fact robbed him of some of his self-assurance when he first reported to the Computer in charge of the Section.
That was Assistant Computer Hobbe Finge, whose pursed, suspicious mouth and frowning eyes seemed ludicrous in such a face as his. He had a round button of a nose, two larger buttons of cheeks. He needed only a touch of red and a fringe of white hair to be converted into the picture of the Primitive myth of St. Nicholas.
(-or Santa Claus or Kriss Kringle. Harlan knew all three names. He doubted if one Eternal out of a hundred thousand had heard of any one of them. Harlan took a secret, shamefaced pride in this sort of arcane knowledge. From his earliest days in school he had ridden the hobbyhorse of Primitive history, and Educator Yarrow had encouraged it. Harlan had grown actually fond of those odd, perverted Centuries that lay, not only before the beginning of Eternity in the 27th, but even before the invention of the Temporal Field, itself, in the 24th. He had used old books and periodicals in his studies. He had even traveled far downwhen to the earliest Centuries of Eternity, when he could get permission, to consult better sources. For over fifteen years he had managed to collect a remarkable library of his own, almost all in print-on-paper. There was a volume by a man called H. G. Wells, another by a man named W. Shakespeare, some tattered histories. Best of all there was a complete set of bound volumes of a Primitive news weekly that took up inordinate space but that he could not, out of sentiment, bear to reduce to micro-film.
Occasionally he would lose himself in a world where life was life and death, death; where a man made his decisions irrevocably; where evil could not be prevented, nor good promoted, and the Battle of Waterloo, having been lost, was really lost for good and all. There was even a scrap of poetry he treasured which stated that a moving finger having once written could never be lured back to unwrite.
And then it was difficult, almost a shock, to return his thoughts to Eternity, and to a universe where Reality was something flexible and evanescent, something men such as himself could hold in the palms of their hands and shake into better shape.)
The illusion of St. Nicholas shattered when Hobbe Finge spoke to him in a brisk, matter-of-fact way. "You can start in tomorrow with a routine screening of current. Reality. I want it good, thorough, and to the point. There will be xio slackness permitted. Your first spatio-temporal chart will be ready for you tomorrow morning. Got it?"
"Yes, Computer," said Harlan. He decided as early as that that he and Assistant Computer Hobbe Finge would not get along, and he regretted it.
The next morning Harlan got his chart in intricately punched patterns as they emerged from the Computaplex. He used a pocket decoder to translate them into Standard Intertemporal in his anxiety to make not even the smallest mistake at the very beginning. Of course, he had reached the stage where he could read the perforations direct.
The chart told him where and when in the world of the 482nd Century he might go and where he might not; what he could do and what be could not; what he must avoid at all costs. His presence must impinge only upon those places and times where it would not endanger Reality.
The 482nd was not a comfortable Century for him. It was not like his own austere and conformist homewhen. It was an era without ethics or principles, as he was accustomed to think of such. It was hedonistic, materialistic, more than a little matriarchal. It was the only era (he checked this in the records in the most painstaking way) in which ectogenic birth flourished and, at its peak, 40 per cent of its women gave eventual birth by merely contributing a fertilized ovum to the ovaria. Marriage was made and unmade by mutual consent and was not recognized legally as anything more than a personal agreement without binding force. Union for the sake of childbearing was, of course, carefully differentiated from the social functions of marriage and was arranged on purely eugenic principles.
In a hundred ways Harlan thought the society sick and therefore hungered for a Reality Change. More than once it occurred to him that his own presence in the Century, as a man not of that time, could fork its history. If his disturbing presence could only be made disturbing enough at some key point, a different branch of possibility would become real, a branch in which millions of pleasure-seeking women would find themselves transformed into true, pure-hearted mothers. They would be in another Reality with all the memories that belonged with it, unable to tell, dream, or fancy that they had ever been anything else.
Unfortunately, to do that, he would have to step outside the bounds of the spatio-temporal chart and that was unthinkable. Even if it weren't, to step outside the bounds at random could change Reality in many possible ways. It could be made worse. Only careful analysis and Computing could properly pin-point the nature of a Reality Change.
Outwardly, whatever his private opinions, Harlan remained an Observer, and the ideal Observer was merely a set of sense-perceptive nerve patches attached to a report-writing mechanism. Between perception and report there must be no intervention of emotion.
Harlan's reports were perfection itself in that respect.
Assistant Computer Finge called him in after his second weekly report.
"I congratulate you, Observer," he said in a voice without warmth, "on the organization and clarity of your reports. But what do you really think?"
Harlan sought refuge in an expression as blank as though chipped painstakingly out of native 95th Century wood. He said, "I have no thoughts of my own in the matter."
"Oh, come. You're from the 95th and we both know what that means. Surely this Century disturbs you."
Harlan shrugged. "Does anything in my reports lead you to think that I am disturbed?"
It was near to impudence and the drumming of Finge's blunt nails upon his desk showed it. Finge said, "Answer my question."
Harlan said, "Sociologically, many facets of the Century represent an extreme. The last three Reality Changes in the aboutwhen have accentuated that. Eventually, I suppose the matter should be rectified. Extremes are never healthy."
"Then you took the trouble to check the past Realities of the Century."
"As an Observer, I must check all pertinent facts."
It was a standoff. Harlan, of course, did have the right and the duty to check those facts. Finge must know that. Every Century was continually being shaken by Reality Changes. No Observations, however painstaking, could ever stand for long without rechecking. It was standard procedure in Eternity to have every Century in a chronic state of being Observed. And to Observe properly, you must be able to present, not only the facts of the current Reality, but also of their relationship to those of previous Realities.
Yet it seemed obvious to Harlan that this was not merely unpleasantness on Finge's part, this probing of the Observer's opinions. Finge seemed definitely hostile.
At another time Finge said to Harlan (having invaded the latter's small office to bring the news), "Your reports are creating a very favorable impression with the Allwhen Council."
Harlan paused, uncertain, then mumbled, "Thank you."
"All agree that you show an uncommon degree of penetration."
"I do my best."
Finge asked suddenly, "Have you ever met Senior Computer Twissell?"
"Computer Twissell?" Harlan's eyes widened. "No, sir. Why do you ask?"
"He seems particularly interested in your reports." Finge's round cheeks drew downward sulkily and he changed the subject. "To me it seems that you have worked out a philosophy of your own, a viewpoint of history."
Temptation tugged hard at Harlan. Vanity and caution battled and the former won. "I've studied Primitive history, sir."
"Primitive history? At school?"
"Not exactly, Computer. On my own. It's my-hobby. It's like watching history standing still, frozen! It can be studied in detail whereas the Centuries of Eternity are always changing." He warmed up a trifle at the thought of it. "It's as though we were to take a series of stills from a book-film and study each painstakingly. We would see a great deal we would miss if we just scanned the film as it went past. I think that helps me a great deal with my work."
Finge stared at him in amazement, widened his eyes a little, and left with no further remark.
Occasionally, thereafter, he brought up the subject of Primitive history and accepted Harlan's reluctant comments with no decisive expression on his own plump face.
Harlan was not sure whether to regret the whole matter or to regard it as a possible way of speeding his own advancement.
He decided on the first alternative when, passing him one day in Corridor A, Finge said abruptly and in the hearing of others, "Great Time, Harlan, don't you ever smile?"
The thought came, shockingly, to Harlan that Finge hated him. His own feeling for Finge approached something like detestation thereafter.


Three months of raking through the 482nd had exhausted most of its worth-while meat and when Harlan received a sudden call to Finge's office, he was not surprised. He was expecting a change in assignment. His final summary had been prepared days before. The 482nd was anxious to export more cellulose-base textiles to Centuries which were deforested, such as the 1174th, but were unwilling to accept smoked fish in return. A long list of such items was contained in due order and with due analysis.
He took the draft of the summary with him.
But no mention of the 482nd was made. Instead Finge introduced him to a withered and wrinkled little man, with sparse white hair and a gnomelike face that throughout the interview was stamped with a perpetual smile. It varied between extremes of anxiety and joviality but never quite disappeared. Between two of his yellow-stained fingers lay a burning cigarette.
It was the first cigarette Harlan had ever seen, otherwise he would have paid more attention to the man, less to the smoking cylinder, and been better prepared for Finge's introduction.
Finge said, "Senior Computer Twissell, this is Observer Andrew Harlan."
Harlan's eyes shifted in shock from the little man's cigarette to his face.
Senior Computer Twissell said in a high-pitched voice, "How do you do? So this is the young man who writes those excellent reports?"
Harlan found no voice. Laban Twissell was a legend, a living myth. Laban Twissell was a man he should have recognized at once. He was the outstanding Computer in Eternity, which was another way of saying he was the most eminent Eternal alive. He was the dean of the Allwhen Council. He had directed more Reality Changes than any man in the history of Eternity. He was-- He had-- Harlan's mind failed him altogether. He nodded his head with a doltish grin and said nothing.
Twissell put his cigarette to his lips, puffed quickly, and took it away. "Leave us, Finge. I want to talk to the boy."
Finge rose, murmured something, and left.
Twissell said, "You seem nervous, boy. There is nothing to be nervous about."
But meeting Twissell like that was a shock. It is always disconcerting to find that someone you have thought of as a giant is actually less than five and a half feet tall. Could the brain of a genius actually fit behind the retreating, bald-smooth forehead? Was it sharp intelligence or only good humor that beamed out of the little eyes that screwed up into a thousand wrinkles.
Harlan didn't know what to think. The cigarette seemed to obscure what small scrabble of intelligence he could collect. He flinched visibly as a puff of smoke reached him.
Twissell's eyes narrowed as though he were trying to peer through the smoke haze and he said in horribly accented tenth-millennial dialect, "Will you petter feel if I in your yourself dialect should speech, poy?"
Harlan, brought to the sudden brink of hysterical laughter, said carefully, "I speak Standard Intertemporal quite well, sir." He said it in the Intertemporal he and all other Eternals in his presence had used ever since his first months in Eternity.
"Nonsense," said Twissell imperiously. "I do not bother of Intertemporal. My speech of ten-millennial is over than perfect."
Harlan guessed that it had been some forty years since Twissell had had to make use of localwhen dialects.
But having made his point to his own satisfaction, apparently, he shifted to Intertemporal and remained there. He said, "I would offer you a cigarette, but I am certain you don't smoke. Smoking is approved of hardly anywhen in history. In fact, good cigarettes are made only in the 72nd and mine have to be specially imported from there. I give you that hint in case you ever become a smoker. It is all very sad. Last week, I was stuck in the 123rd for two days. No smoking. I mean, even in the Section of Eternity devoted to the 123rd. The Eternals there have picked up the mores. If I had lit a cigarette it would have been like the sky collapsing. Sometimes I think I should like to calculate one great Reality Change and wipe out all the no-smoking taboos in all the Centuries, except that any Reality Change like that would make for wars in the 58th or a slave society in the 1000th. Always something."
Harlan was first confused, then anxious. Surely these rattling irrelevancies must be hiding something.
His throat felt a little constricted. He said, "May I ask why you've arranged to see me, sir?"
"I like your reports, boy."
There was a veiled glimmer of joy in Harlan's eyes, but he did not smile. "Thank you, sir."
"It has a touch of the artist. You are intuitive. You feel strongly. I think I know your proper position in Eternity and I have come to offer it to you."
Harlan thought: I can't believe this.
He held all triumph out of his voice. "You do me great honor, sir," he said.
Whereupon Senior Computer Twissell, having come to the end of his cigarette, produced another in his left hand by some unnoted feat of legerdemain and lit it. He said between puffs, "For Time's sake, boy, you talk as though you rehearsed lines. Great honor, bah. Piffle. Trash. Say what you feel in plain language. You're glad, hey?"
"Yes, sir," said Harlan cautiously.
"All right. You should be. How would you like to be a Technician?"
"A Technician!" cried Harlan, leaping from his seat.
"Sit down. Sit down. You seem surprised."
"I hadn't expected to be a Technician, Computer Twissell."
"No," said Twissell dryly, "somehow no one ever does. They expect anything but that. Yet Technicians are hard to find, and are always in demand. Not a Section in Eternity has what it considers enough."
"I don't think I'm suited."
"You mean you're not suited to take a job with trouble in it. By Time, if you are devoted to Eternity, as I believe you are, you won't mind that. So the fools will avoid you and you will feel ostracized. You will grow used to that. And you will have the satisfaction of knowing you are needed, and needed badly. By me."
"By you, sir? By you particularly?"
"Yes." An element of shrewdness entered the old man's smile. "You are not to be just a Technician. You will be my personal Technician. You will have special status. How does that sound now?"
Harlan said, "I don't know, sir. I may not qualify."
Twissell shook his head firmly. "I need you. I need just you. Your reports assure me you have what I need up here." He tapped his forehead quickly with a ridge-nailed forefinger. "Your record as Cub is good; the Sections for which you have Observed reported favorably. Finally, Finge's report was most suitable of all."
Harlan was honestly startled. "Computer Finge's report was favorable?"
"You didn't expect that?"
"I-don't know."
"Well, boy, I didn't say it was favorable. I said it was suitable. As a matter of fact, Finge's report was not favorable. He recommended that you be removed from all duties connected with Reality Changes. He suggested it wasn't safe to keep you anywhere but in Maintenance."
Harlan reddened. "What were his reasons for saying so, sir?"
"It seems you have a hobby, boy. You are interested in Primitive history, eh?" He gestured expansively with his cigarette and Harlan, forgetting in his anger to control his breathing, inhaled a cloud of smoke and coughed helplessly.
Twissell regarded the young Observer's coughing spell benignly and said, "Isn't that so?"
Harlan began, "Computer Finge had no right-"
"Now, now. I told you what was in the report because it hinges on the purpose I need you most for. Actually, the report was confidential and you are to forget I told you what was in it. Permanently, boy."
"But what's wrong with being interested in Primitive history?"
"Finge thinks your interest in it shows a strong Wish-to-Time. You understand me, boy?"
Harlan did. It was impossible to avoid picking up psychiatric lingo. That phrase above all. Every member of Eternity was supposed to have a strong drive, the stronger for being officially suppressed in all its manifestations, to return, not necessarily to his own Time, but at least to some one definite Time; to become part of a Century, rather than to remain a wanderer through them all. Of course in most Eternals the drive remained safely hidden in the unconscious.
"I don't think that's the case," said Harlan.
"Nor I. In fact, I think your hobby is interesting and valuable. As I said, it's why I want you. I want you to teach a Cub I shall bring to you all you know and all you can learn about Primitive history. In between, you will also be my personal Technician. You'll start in a few days. Is that agreeable?"
Agreeable? To have official permission to learn all he could about the days before Eternity? To be personally associated with the greatest Eternal of them all? Even the nasty fact of Technician's status seemed bearable under those conditions.
His caution, however, did not entirely fail him. He said, "If it's necessary for the good of Eternity, sir--"
"For the good of Eternity?" cried the gnomish Computer in sudden excitement. He threw his cigarette butt from him with such energy that it hit the far wall and bounced off in a shower of sparks. "I need you for the existence of Eternity."






3. Cub


Harlan had been in the 575th for weeks before he met Brinsley Sheridan Cooper. He had time to grow used to his new quarters and to the antisepsis of glass and porcelain. He learned to wear the Technician's mark with only moderate shrinking and to refrain from making things worse by standing so that the insigne was hidden against a wall or was covered by the interposition of some object he was carrying.
Others smiled disdainfully when that was done and turned colder as though they suspected an attempt to invade their friendship on false pretenses.
Senior Computer Twissell brought him problems daily. Harlan studied them and wrote his analyses in drafts that were four times rewritten, the last version being handed in reluctantly even so.
Twissell would appraise them and nod and say, "Good, good." Then his old blue eyes would dart quickly at Harlan and his smile would narrow a bit as he said, "I'll test this guess on the Computaplex."
He always called the analysis a "guess." He never told Harlan the result of the Computaplex check, and Harlan dared not ask. He was despondent over the fact that he was never asked to put any of his own analyses into action. Did that mean that the Computaplex was not checking him, that he had been choosing the wrong item for the induction of a Reality Change, that he did not have the knack of seeing the Minimum Necessary Change in an indicated range? (It was not until later that he grew sufficiently sophisticated to have the phrase come rolling off his tongue as M.N.C.)


One day Twissell came in with an abashed individual who seemed scarcely to dare raise his eyes to meet Harlan's.
Twissell said, "Technician Harlan, this is Cub B. S. Cooper."
Automatically Harlan said, "Hello," weighed the man's appearance, and was unimpressed. The fellow was on the shortish side, with dark hair parted in the middle. His chin was narrow, his eyes an indefinite light brown, his ears a little large, and his fingernails bitten.
Twissell said, "This is the boy to whom you will be teaching Primitive history."
"Great Time," said Harlan with suddenly increased interest. "Hello!" He had almost forgotten.
Twissell said, "Arrange a schedule with him that will suit you, Harlan. If you can manage two afternoons a week, I think that would be fine. Use your own method of teaching him. I'll leave that to you. If you should need book-films or old documents, tell me, and if they exist in Eternity or in any part of Time that can be reached, we'll get them. Eh, boy?"
He plucked a lit cigarette out of nowhere (as it always seemed) and the air reeked with smoke. Harlan coughed and from the twisting of the Cub's mouth it was quite obvious that the latter would have done the same had he dared.
After Twissell left, Harlan said, "Well, sit down"-he hesitated a moment, then added determinedly-"Son. Sit down, son. My office isn't much, but it's yours whenever we're together."
Harlan was almost flooded with eagerness. This project was his! Primitive history was something that was all his own.
The Cub raised his eyes (for the first time, really) and said stumblingly, "You are a Technician."
A considerable part of Harlan's excitement and warmth died. "What of it?"
"Nothing," said the Cub. "I just--"
"You heard Computer Twissell address me as Technician, didn't you?"
"Yes, sir."
"Did you think it was a slip of the tongue? Something too bad to be true?"
"No, sir."
"What's wrong with your speech?" Harlan asked brutally, and even as he did so, he felt shame nudge him.
Cooper blushed painfully. "I'm not very good at Standard Intertemporal."
"Why not? How long have you been a Cub?"
"Less than one year, sir."
"One year? How old are you, for Time's sake?"
"Twenty-four physioyears, sir."
Harlan stared. "Are you trying to tell me that they took you into Eternity at twenty-three?"
"Yes, sir."
Harlan sat down and rubbed his hands together. That just wasn't done. Fifteen to sixteen was the age of entrance into Eternity. What was this? A new kind of testing of himself on the part of Twissell?
He said, "Sit down and let's get started. Your name in full and your homewhen."
The Cub stammered, "Brinsley Sheridan Cooper of the 78th, sir."
Harlan almost softened. That was close. It was only seventeen Centuries downwhen from his own homewhen. Almost a Temporal neighbor.
He said, "Are you interested in Primitive history?"
"Computer Twissell asked me to learn. I don't know much about it."
"What else are you learning?"
"Mathematics. Temporal engineering. I'm just getting the fundamentals so far. Back in the 78th, I was a Speedy-vac repairman."
There was no point in asking the nature of a Speedy-vac. It might be a suction cleaner, a computing machine, a type of spray painter. Anything. Harlan wasn't particularly interested.
He said, "Do you know anything about history? Any kind of history?"
"I studied European history."
"Your particular political unit, I take it."
"I was born in Europe. Yes. Mostly, of course, they taught us modern history. After the revolutions of '54; 7554, that is."
"All right. First thing you do is to forget it. It doesn't mean anything. The history they try to teach Timers changes with every Reality Change. Not that they realize that. In each Reality, their history is the only history. That's what's so different about Primitive history. That's the beauty of it. No matter what any of us does, it exists precisely as it has always existed. Columbus and Washington, Mussolini and Hereford, they all exist."
Cooper smiled feebly. He brushed his little finger across his upper lip and for the first time Harlan noticed a trace of bristle there as though the Cub were cultivating a mustache.
Cooper said, "I can't quite-get used to it, all the time I've been here."
"Get used to what?"
"Being five hundred Centuries away from homewhen."
"I'm nearly that myself. I'm 95th."
"That's another thing. You're older than I am and yet I'm seventeen Centuries older than you in another way. I can be your great-great-great-and-so-on-grandfather."
"What's the difference? Suppose you are?"
"Well, it takes getting used to." There was a trace of rebellion in the Cub's voice.
"It does for all of us," said Harlan callously, and began talking about the Primitives. By the time three hours had passed, he was deep in an explanation concerning the reasons why there were Centuries before the ist Century.
("But isn't the 1st Century first?" Cooper had asked plaintively.)
Harlan ended by giving the Cub a book, not a good one, really, but one that would serve as a beginning. "I'll get you better stuff as we go along," he said.


By the end of a week Cooper's mustache had become a pronounced dark bristle that made him look ten years older and accentuated the narrowness of his chin. On the whole, Harlan decided, it would not be an improvement, that mustache.
Cooper said, "I've finished your book."
"What did you think of it?"
"In a way--" There was a long pause. Cooper began over again. "Parts of the later Primitive was something like the 78th. It made me think of home, you know. Twice, I dreamed about my wife."
Harlan exploded. "Your wife?"
"I was married before I came here."
"Great Time! Did they bring your wife across too?"
Cooper shook his head. "I don't even know if she's been Changed in the last year. If she has, I suppose she's not really my wife now."
Harlan recovered. Of course, if the Cub were twenty-three years old when he was taken into Eternity, it was quite possible that he might have been married. One thing unprecedented led to another.
What was going on? Once modifications were introduced into the rules, it wouldn't be a long step to the point where everything would decline into a mass of incoherency. Eternity was too finely balanced an arrangement to endure modification.
It was his anger on behalf of Eternity, perhaps, that put an unintended harshness into Harlan's next words. "I hope you're not planning on going back to the 78th to check on her."
The Cub lifted his head and his eyes were firm and steady. "No."
Harlan shifted uneasily, "Good. You have no family. Nothing. You're an Eternal and don't ever think of anyone you knew in Time."
Cooper's lips thinned, and his accent stood out sharply in his quick words. "You're speaking like a Technician."
Harlan's fists clenched along the sides of his desk. He said hoarsely, "What do you imply? I'm a Technician so I make the Changes? So I defend them and demand that you accept them? Look, kid, you haven't been here a year; you can't speak Intertemporal; you're all misgeared on Time and Reality, but you think you know all about Technicians and how to kick them in the teeth."
"I'm sorry," said Cooper quickly; "I didn't mean to offend you."
"No, no, who offends a Technician? You just hear everyone else talking, is that it? They say, 'Cold as a Technician's heart,' don't they? They say, 'A trillion personalities changed-just a Technician's yawn.' Maybe a few other things. What's the answer, Mr. Cooper? Does it make you feel sophisticated to join in? It makes you a big man? A big wheel in Eternity?"
"I said I'm sorry."
"All right. I just want you to know I've been a Technician for less than a month and I personally have never induced a Reality Change. Now let's get on with business."


Senior Computer Twissell called Andrew Harlan to his office the next day.
He said, "How would you like to go out on an M.N.C., boy?"
It was almost too apposite. All that morning Harlan had been regretting his cowardly disclaimer of personal involvement in the Technician's work; his childish cry of: I haven't done anything wrong yet, so don't blame me.
It amounted to an admission that there was something wrong about a Technician's work, and that he himself was blameless only because he was too new at the game to have had time to be a criminal.
He welcomed the chance to kill that excuse now. It would be almost a penance. He could say to Cooper: Yes, because of something I have done, this many millions of people are new personalities, but it was necessary and I am proud to have been the cause.
So Harlan said joyfully, "I'm ready, sir."
"Good. Good. You'll be glad to know, boy," (a puff, and the cigarette tip glowed brilliantly) "that every one of your analyses checked out with high-order accuracy."
"Thank you, sir." (They were analyses now, thought Harlan, not guesses.)
"You've got a talent. Quite a touch, boy. I look for great things. And we can begin with this one, 223rd. Your statement that a jammed vehicle clutch would supply the necessary fork without undesirable side effects is perfectly correct. Will you jam it?"
"Yes, sir."
That was Harlan's true initiation into Technicianhood. After that he was more than just a man with a rose-red badge. He had handled Reality. He had tampered with a mechanism during a quick few minutes taken out of the 223rd and, as a result, a young man did not reach a lecture on mechanics he had meant to attend. He never went in for solar engineering, consequently, and a perfectly simple device was delayed in its development a crucial ten years. A war in the 224th, amazingly enough, was moved out of Reality as a result.
Wasn't that good? What if personalities were changed? The new personalities were as human as the old and as deserving of life. If some lives were shortened, more were lengthened and made happier. A great work of literature, a monument of Man's intellect and feeling, was never written in the new Reality, but several copies were preserved in Eternity's libraries, were they not? And new creative works had come into existence, had they not?
Yet that night Harlan spent hours in a hot agony of wakefulness, and when he finally drowsed groggily, he did something he hadn't done in years.
He dreamed of his mother.


Despite the weakness of such a beginning a physioyear was sufficient to make Harlan known throughout Eternity as "Twissell's Technician," and, with more than a trace of ill-humor as "The Wonder Boy" and "The Never-Wrong."
His contact with Cooper became almost comfortable. They never grew completely friendly. (If Cooper could have brought himself to make advances, Harlan might not have known how to respond.) Nevertheless they worked well together, and Cooper's interest in Primitive history grew to the point where it nearly rivaled Harlan's.
One day Harlan said to Cooper, "Look, Cooper, would you mind coming in tomorrow instead? I've got to get up to the 3000's sometime this week to check on an Observation and the man I want to see is free this afternoon."
Cooper's eyes lit up hungrily, "Why can't I come?"
"Do you want to?"
"Sure. I've never been in a kettle except when they brought me here from the 78th and I didn't know what was happening at the time."
Harlan was accustomed to using the kettle in Shaft C, which was, by unwritten custom, reserved for Technicians along its entire immeasurable length through the Centuries. Cooper showed no embarrassment at being led there. He stepped into the kettle without hesitation and took his seat on the curved molding that completely circled it.
When Harlan, however, had activated the Field, and kicked the kettle into upwhen motion, Cooper's face screwed up into an almost comic expression of surprise.
"I don't feel a thing," he said. "Is anything wrong?"
"Nothing's wrong. You're not feeling anything because you're not really moving. You're being kicked along the temporal extension of the kettle. In fact," Harlan said, growing didactic, "at the moment, you and I aren't matter, really, in spite of appearances. A hundred men could be using this same kettle, moving (if you can call it that) at various velocities in either Time-direction, passing through one another and so on. The laws of the ordinary universe just don't apply to the kettle shafts!"
Cooper's mouth quirked a bit and Harlan thought uneasily: The kid's taking temporal engineering and knows more about this than I do. Why don't I shut up and stop making a fool of myself?
He retreated into silence, and stared somberly at Cooper. The younger man's mustache had been full-grown for months. It drooped, framing his mouth in what Eternals called a Mallansohn hairline, because the only photograph known to be authentic of the Temporal Field inventor (and that a poor one and out of focus) showed him with just such a mustache. For that reason it maintained a certain popularity among Eternals even though it did few of them justice.
Cooper's eyes were fixed on the shifting numbers that marked the passing of the Centuries with respect to themselves. He said, "How far upwhen does the kettle shaft go?"
"Haven't they taught you that?"
"They've hardly mentioned the kettles."
Harlan shrugged. "There's no end to Eternity. The shaft goes on forever."
"How far upwhen have you gone?"
"This will be the uppest. Dr. Twissell has been up to the 50,000's."
"Great Time!" whispered Cooper.
"That's still nothing. Some Eternals have been up past the 150,000th Century."
"What's that like?"
"Like nothing at all," said Harlan morosely. "Lots of life but none of it human. Man is gone."
"Dead? Wiped out?"
"I don't know that anyone exactly knows."
"Can't something be done to change that?"
"Well, from the 70,000's on--" began Harlan, then ended abruptly. "Oh, to Time with it. Change the subject."
If there was one subject about which Eternals were almost superstitious, it was the "Hidden Centuries," the time between the 70,000th and the 150,000th. It was a subject that was rarely mentioned. It was only Harlan's close association with Twissell that accounted for his own small knowledge of the era. What it amounted to was that Eternals couldn't pass into Time in all those thousands of Centuries. The doors between Eternity and Time were impenetrable. Why? No one knew.
Harlan imagined, from some casual remarks of Twissell's, that attempts had been made to Change the Reality in the Centuries just downwhen from the 70,000th, but without adequate Observation beyond the 70,000th not much could be done.
Twissell had laughed a bit one time and said, "We'll get through someday. Meanwhile, 70,000 Centuries is quite enough to take care of."
It did not sound wholly convincing.
"What happens to Eternity after the 150,000th?" asked Cooper.
Harlan sighed. The subject, apparently, was not to be changed. "Nothing," he said. "The Sections are there but there are no Eternals in it anywhere after the 70,000th. The Sections keep on going for millions of Centuries till all life is gone and past that, too, till the sun becomes a nova, and past that, too. There isn't any end to Eternity. That's why it's called Eternity."
"The sun does become a nova, then?"
"It certainly does. Eternity couldn't exist if that weren't so. Nova Sol is our power supply. Listen, do you know how much power is required to set up a Temporal Field? Mallansohn's first Field was two seconds from extreme downwhen to extreme upwhen and big enough to hold not more than a match head and that took a nuclear power plant's complete output for one day. It took nearly a hundred years to set up a hair-thin Temporal Field far enough upwhen to be able to tap the radiant power of the nova so that a Field could be built big enough to hold a man."
Cooper sighed. "I wish they would get to the point where they stopped making me learn equations and field mechanics and start telling me some of the interesting stuff. Now if I had lived in Mallansohn's time--"
"You would have learned nothing. He lived in the 24th, but Eternity didn't start till late in the 27th. Inventing the Field isn't the same as constructing Eternity, you know, and the rest of the 24th didn't have the slightest inkling of what Mallansohn's invention signified."
"He was ahead of his generation, then?"
"Very much so. He not only invented the Temporal Field, but he described the basic relationships that made Eternity possible and predicted almost every aspect of it except for the Reality Change. Quite closely, too-but I think we're pulling to a halt, Cooper. After you."
They stepped out.


Harlan had never seen Senior Computer Laban Twissell angry before. People always said that he was incapable of any emotion, that he was an unsouled fixture of Eternity to the point where he had forgotten the exact number of his homewhen Century. People said that at an early age his heart had atrophied and that a hand computer similar to the model he carried always in his trouser pocket had taken its place.
Twissell did nothing to deny these rumors. In fact most people guessed that he believed them himself.
So even while Harlan bent before the force of the angry blast that struck him, he had room in his mind to be amazed at the fact that Twissell could display anger. He wondered if Twissell would be mortified in some calmer aftermath to realize that his hand-computer heart had betrayed him by exposing itself as only a poor thing of muscle and valves subject to the twists of emotion.
Twissell said, in part, his old voice creaking, "Father Time, boy, are you on the Allwhen Council? Do you give the orders around here? Do you tell me what to do or do I tell you what to do? Are you making arrangements for all kettle trips this Section? Do we all come to you for permission now?"
He interrupted himself with occasional exclamations of "Answer me," then continued pouring more questions into the boiling interrogative caldron.
He said finally, "If you ever get above yourself this way again, I'll have you on plumbing repair and for good. Do you understand me?"
Harlan, pale with his own gathering embarrassment, said, "I was never told that Cub Cooper was not to be taken on the kettle."
The explanation did not act as an emollient. "What kind of an excuse is a double negative, boy? You were never told not to get him drunk. You were never told not to shave him bald. You were never told not to skewer him with a fine-edged Tav curve. Father Time, boy, what were you told to do with him?"
"I was told to teach him Primitive history."
"Then do so. Do nothing more than that." Twissell dropped his cigarette and ground it savagely underfoot as though it were the face of a lifelong enemy.
"I'd like to point out, Computer," said Harlan, "that many Centuries under the current Reality somewhat resemble specific eras of Primitive history in one or more respects. It had been my intention to take him out to those Times, under careful spatio-temporal charting, of course, as a form of field trip."
"What? Listen, you chucklehead, don't you ever intend to ask my permission for anything? That's out. Just teach him Primitive history. No field trips. No laboratory experiments, either. Next you'll be changing Reality just to show him how."
Harlan licked his dry lips with a dry tongue, muttered a resentful acquiescence, and, eventually, was allowed to leave.
It took weeks for his hurt feelings to heal over somewhat.






4. Computer


Harlan had been two years a Technician when he re-entered the 482nd for the first time since leaving with Twissell. He found it almost unrecognizable.
It had not changed. He had.
Two years of Technicianhood had meant a number of things. In one sense it had increased his feeling of stability. He had no longer to learn a new language, get used to new styles of clothing and new ways of life with every new Observation project. On the other hand, it had resulted in a withdrawal on his own part. He had almost forgotten now the camaraderie that united all the rest of the Specialists in Eternity.
Most of all, he had developed the feeling of the power of being a Technician. He held the fate of millions in his finger tips, and if one must walk lonely because of it, one could also walk proudly.
So he could stare coldly at the Communications man behind the entry desk of the 482nd and announce himself in clipped syllables: "Andrew Harlan, Technician, reporting to Computer Finge for temporary assignment to the 482nd," disregarding the quick glance from the middle-aged man he faced.
It was what some people called the "Technician glance," a quick, involuntary sidelong peek at the rose-red shoulder emblem of the Technician, then an elaborate attempt not to look at it again.
Harlan stared at the other's shoulder emblem. It was not the yellow of the Computer, the green of the Life-Plotter, the blue of the Sociologist, or the white of the Observer. It was not the Specialist's solid color at all. It was simply a blue bar on white. The man was Communications, a subbranch of Maintenance, not a Specialist at all.
And he gave the "Technician glance" too.
Harlan said a little sadly, "Well?"
Communications said quickly, "I'm ringing Computer Finge, sir."


Harlan remembered the 482nd as solid and massive, but now it seemed almost squalid.
Harlan had grown used to the glass and porcelain of the 575th, to its fetish of cleanliness. He had grown accustomed to a world of whiteness and clarity, broken by sparse patches of light pastel.
The heavy plaster swirls of the 482nd, its splashy pigments, its areas of painted metal were almost repulsive.
Even Finge seemed different, less than life-size, somewhat. Two years earlier, to Observer Harlan, Finge's every gesture had seemed sinister and powerful.
Now, from the lofty and isolated heights of Technicianhood, the man seemed pathetic and lost. Harlan watched him as he leafed through a sheaf of foils and got ready to look up, with the air of someone who is beginning to think he has made his visitor wait the duly required amount of time.
Finge was from an energy-centered Century in the 600's. Twissell had told him that and it explained a good deal. Finge's flashes of illtemper could easily be the result of the natural insecurity of a heavy man used to the firmness of field-forces and unhappy to be dealing with nothing more than flimsy matter. His tiptoeing walk (Harlan remembered Finge's catlike tread well; often he would look up from his desk, see Finge standing there staring at him, his approach having been unheard) was no longer something sly and sneaking, but rather the fearful and reluctant tread of one who lives in the constant, if unconscious, fear that the flooring would break under his weight.
Harlan thought, with a pleasant condescension: The man is poorly adjusted to the Section. Reassignment is probably the only thing that would help him.
Finge said, "Greetings, Technician Harlan."
"Greetings, Computer," said Harlan.
Finge said, "It seems that in the two years since--"
"Two physioyears," said Harlan.
Finge looked up in surprise. "Two physioyears, of course."
In Eternity there was no Time as one ordinarily thought of Time in the universe outside, but men's bodies grew older and that was the unavoidable measure of Time even in the absence of meaningful physical phenomena. Physiologically Time passed, and in a physioyear within Eternity a man grew as much older as he would have in an ordinary year in Time.
Yet even the most pedantic Eternal remembered the distinction only rarely. It was too convenient to say, "See you tomorrow," or "I missed you yesterday," or "I will see you next week," as though there were a tomorrow or a yesterday or a last week in any but a physiological sense. And the instincts of humanity were catered to by having the activities of Eternity tailored to an arbitrary twenty-four "physiohour" day, with a solemn assumption of day and night, today and tomorrow.
Finge said, "In the two physioyears since you left, a crisis has gradually gathered about the 482nd. A rather peculiar one. A delicate one. Almost unprecedented. We need accurate Observation now as we never have needed it before."
"And you want me to Observe?"
"Yes. In a way, it's a waste of talent to ask a Technician to do a job of Observation, but your previous Observations, for clarity and insight, were perfect. We need that again. Now I'll just sketch in a few detailsÖ"
What those details were Harlan was not to find out just then. Finge spoke, but the door opened, and Harlan did not hear him.
He stared at the person who entered.
It was not that Harlan had never seen a girl in Eternity before. Never was too strong a word. Rarely, yes, but not never.
But a girl such as this! And in Eternity!_
Harlan had seen many women in his passages through Time, but in Time they were only objects to him, like walls and balls, barrows and harrows, kittens and mittens. They were facts to be Observed.
In Eternity a girl was a different matter. And one like this!_
She was dressed in the style of the upper classes of the 482nd, which meant transparent sheathing and not very much else above the waist, and flimsy, knee-length trousers below. The latter, while opaque enough, hinted delicately at gluteal curves.
Her hair was glossily dark and shoulder length, her lips redly penciled thin above and full below in an exaggerated pout. Her upper eyelids and her ear lobes were tinted a pale rose and the rest of her youthful (almost girlish) face was a startlingly milky white. Jeweled pendants descended forward from mid-shoulder to tinkle now this side, now that of the graceful breasts to which they drew attention.
She took her seat at a desk in the corner of Finge's office, lifting her eyelashes only once to sweep her dark glance across Harlan's face.
When Harlan heard Finge's voice again, the Computer was saying, "You'll get all this in an official report and meanwhile you can have your old office and sleeping quarters."
Harlan found himself outside Finge's office without quite remembering the details of his leaving. Presumably he had walked out.
The emotion within him that was easiest to recognize was anger. _By Time_, Finge ought not to be allowed to do this. It was bad for morale. It made a mockery-- He stopped himself, unclenched his fist, unclamped his jaw. Let's see, now! His footsteps sounded sharply in his own ear as he strode firmly toward the Communications man behind the desk.
Communications looked up, without quite meeting his eye, and said cautiously, "Yes, sir."
Harlan said, "There's a woman at a desk in Computer Finge's office. Is she new here?"
He had meant to ask it casually. He had meant to make it a bored, indifferent question. It rang out, instead, like a pair of cymbals clashing.
But it roused Communications. The look in his eye became something that made all men kin. It even embraced the Technician, drew him in as a fellow. Communications said, "You mean the babe? Wow! Isn't she built like a force-field latrine, though?"
Harlan stammered a bit. "Just answer my question."
Communications stared and some of his steam evaporated. He said, "She's new. She's a Timer."
"What's her job?"
A slow smile crept over Communications' face and grew into a leer. "She's supposed to be the boss's secretary. Her name is Noys Lambent."
"All right." Harlan turned on his heel and left.
Harlan's first Observation trip into the 482nd came the next day, but it lasted for thirty minutes only. It was obviously only an orientation trip, intended to get him into the feel of things. He entered it for an hour and a half the next day and not at all on the third.
He occupied his time in working his way through his original reports, relearning his own knowledge, brushing up on the language system of the time, accustoming himself to the local costumes again.
One Reality Change had hit the 482nd, but it was very minor. A political clique that had been In was now Out, but there seemed no change in the society otherwise.
Without quite realizing it he slipped into the habit of searching his old reports for information on the aristocracy. Surely he had made Observations.
He had, but they were impersonal, from a distance. His data concerned them as a class, not as individuals.
Of course his spatio-temporal charts had never demanded or even permitted him to observe the aristocracy from within. What the reasons for that might have been was beyond the purview of an Observer. He was impatient with himself at feeling curiosity concerning that now.
During those three days he had caught glimpses of the girl, Noys Lambent, four times. At first he had been aware only of her clothes and her ornaments. Now he noticed that she was five feet six in height, half a head shorter than himself, yet slim enough and with a carriage erect and graceful enough to give an impression of height. She was older than she first seemed, approaching thirty perhaps, certainly over twenty-five.
She was quiet and reserved, smiled at him once when he passed her in the corridor, then lowered her eyes. Harlan drew aside to avoid touching her, then walked on feeling angry.
By the close of the third day Harlan was beginning to feel that his duty as an Eternal left him only one course of action. Doubtless her position was a comfortable one for herself. Doubtless Finge was within the letter of the law. Yet Finge's indiscretion in the matter, his carelessness certainly went against the spirit of the law, and something should be done about it.
Harlan decided that, after all, there wasn't a man in Eternity he disliked quite as much as Finge. The excuses he had found for the man only a few days before vanished.
On the morning of the fourth day Harlan asked for and received permission to see Finge privately. He walked in with a determined step and, to his own surprise, made his point instantly. "Computer Finge, I suggest that Miss Lambent be returned to Time."
Finge's eyes narrowed. He nodded toward a chair, placed clasped hands under his soft, round chin, and showed some of his teeth. "Well, sit down. Sit down. You find Miss Lambert incompetent? Unsuitable?"
"As to her incompetence and unsuitability, Computer, I cannot say. It depends on the uses to which she is put, and I have put her to none. But you must realize that she is bad for the morale of this Section."
Finge stared at him distantly as though his Computer's mind were weighing abstractions beyond the reach of an ordinary Eternal. "In what way is she hurting morale, Technician?"
"There's no real necessity for you to ask," said Harlan, his anger deepening. "Her costume is exhibitionistic. Her--"
"Wait, wait. Now wait a while, Harlan. You've been an Observer in this era. You know her clothes are standard costume for the 482nd."
"In her own surroundings, in her own cultural milieu, I would have no fault to find, though I'll say right now that her costume is extreme even for the 482nd. You'll allow me to be the judge of that. Here in Eternity, a person such as she is certainly out of place."
Finge nodded his head slowly. He actually seemed to be enjoying himself. Harlan stiffened.
Finge said, "She is here for a deliberate purpose. She is performing an essential function. It is only temporary. Try to endure her meanwhile."
Harlan's jaw quivered. He had protested and was being fobbed off. To hell with caution. He would speak his mind. He said, "I can imagine what the woman's 'essential function' is. To keep her so openly will not be allowed to pass."
He turned stiffly, walked to the door. Finge's voice stopped him.
"Technician," Finge said, "your relationship with Twissell may have given you a distorted notion about your own importance. Correct that! And meanwhile tell me, Technician, have you ever had a" (he hesitated, seeming to pick among words) "girl friend?"
With painstaking and insulting accuracy, back still turned, Harlan quoted: "In the interest of avoiding emotional entanglements with Time, an Eternal may not marry. In the interest of avoiding emotional entanglements with family, an Eternal may not have children."
The Computer said gravely, "I didn't ask about marriage or children."
Harlan quoted further: "Temporary liaisons may be made with Timers only after application with the Central Charting Board of the Allwhen Council for an appropriate Life-Plot of the Timer concerned. Liaisons may be conducted thereafter only according to the requirements of specific spatio-temporal charting."
"Quite true. Have you ever applied for temporary liaison, Technician?"
"No, Computer."
"Do you intend to?"
"No, Computer."
"Perhaps you ought to. It would give you a greater breadth of view. You would become less concerned about the details of a woman's costume, less disturbed about her possible personal relations with other Eternals."
Harlan left, speechless with rage.


He found it almost impossible to perform his near-daily trek into the 482nd (the longest continuous period remaining something under two hours.)
He was upset, and he knew why. Finge! Finge, and his coarse advice concerning liaisons with Timers.
Liaisons existed. Everyone knew that. Eternity had always been aware of the necessity for compromising with human appetites (to Harlan the phrase carried a quivery repulsion), but the restrictions involved in choosing mistresses made the compromise anything but lax, anything but generous. And those who were lucky enough to qualify for such an arrangement were expected to be most discreet about it, out of common decency and consideration for the majority.
Among the lower classes of Eternals, particularly among Maintenance, there were always the rumors (half hopeful, half resentful) of women imported on a more or less permanent basis for the obvious reasons. Always rumor pointed to the Computers and Life-Plotters as the benefiting groups. They and only they could decide which women could be abstracted from Time without danger of significant Reality Change.
Less sensational (and therefore less tongue-worthy) were the stories concerning the Timer employees that every Section engaged temporarily (when spatio-temporal analysis permitted) to perform the tedious tasks of cooking, cleaning, and heavy labor.
But a Timer, and such a Timer, employed as "secretary," could only mean that Finge was thumbing a nose at the ideals that made Eternity what it was.
Regardless of the facts of life to which the practical men of Eternity made a perfunctory obeisance it remained true that the ideal Eternal was a dedicated man living for the mission he had to perform, for the betterment of Reality and the improvement of the sum of human happiness. Harlan liked to think that Eternity was like the rnonasteries of Primitive times.
He dreamed that night that he spoke to Twissell about the matter, and that Twissell, the ideal Eternal, shared his horror. He dreamed of a broken Finge, stripped of rank. He dreamed of himself with the yellow Computer's insigne, instituting a new regime in the 482nd, ordering Finge grandly to a new position in Maintenance. Twissell sat next to him, smiling with admiration, as he drew up a new organizational chart, neat, orderly, consistent, and asked Noys Lambent to distribute copies.
But Noys Lambent was nude, and Harlan woke up, trembling and ashamed.


He met the girl in a corridor one day and stood aside, eyes averted, to let her pass.
But she remained standing, looking at him, until he had to look up and meet her eyes. She was all color and life and Harlan was conscious of a faint perfume about her.
She said, "You're Technician Harlan, aren't you?"
His impulse was to snub her, to force his way past, but, after all, he told himself, all this wasn't her fault. Besides, to move past her now would mean touching her.
So he nodded briefly. "Yes."
"I'm told you're quite an expert on our Time."
"I have been in it."
"I would love to talk to you about it someday."
"I am busy. I wouldn't have time."
"But Mr. Harlan, surely you could find time someday."
She smiled at him.
Harlan said in a desperate whisper, "Will you pass, please? Or will you stand aside to let me pass? Please!"
She moved by with a slow swing of her hips that brought blood tingling to his embarrassed cheeks.
He was angry at her for embarrassing him, angry at himself for being embarrassed, and angry, most of all, for some obscure reason, at Finge.


Finge called him in at the end of two weeks. On his desk was a sheet of perforated flimsy the length and intricacy of which told Harlan at once that this concerned no half-hour excursion into Time.
Finge said, "Would you sit down, Harlan, and scan this thing right now? No, not by eye. Use the machine."
Harlan lifted indifferent eyebrows, and inserted the sheet carefully between the lips of the scanner on Finge's desk. Slowly it passed into the intestines of the machine and, as it did so, the perforation pattern was translated into words that appeared on the cloudy-white rectangle that was the visual attachment.
Somewhere about midpoint, Harlan's hand shot out and disconnected the scanner. He yanked the flimsy out with a force that tore its tough cellulite structure.
Finge said calmly, "I have another copy."
But Harlan was holding the remnants between thumb and forefinger as though it might explode. "Computer Finge, there is some mistake. Surely I am not to be expected to use the home of this woman as base for a near-week stay in Time."
The Computer pursed his lips. "Why not, if the spatio-temporal requirements are such. If there is a personal problem involved between yourself and Miss Lam--"
"No personal problem at all," interposed Harlan hotly.
"Some kind of problem, certainly. In the circumstances, I will go as far as to explain certain aspects of the Observational problem. This is not to be taken as a precedent, of course."
Harlan sat motionless. He was thinking hard and fast. Ordinarily professional pride would have forced Harlan to disdain explanation. An Observer, or Technician, for that matter, did his job without question. And ordinarily a Computer would never dream of offering explanation.
Here, however, was something unusual. Harlan had complained concerning the girl, the so-called secretary. Finge was afraid the complaint might go further. ("The guilty fleeth when no man pursueth," thought Harlan with grim satisfaction and tried to remember where he had read that phrase.)
Finge's strategy was obvious, therefore. By stationing Harlan in the woman's dwelling place he would be ready to make counteraccusations if matters went far enough. Harlan's value as a witness against him would be destroyed.
And, of course, he would have to have some specious explanation for placing Harlan in such a place, and this would be it. Harlan listened with barely hidden contempt.
Finge said, "As you know, the various Centuries are aware of the existence of Eternity. They know that we supervise intertemporal trade. They consider that to be our chief function, which is good. They have a dim knowledge that we are also here to prevent catastrophe from striking mankind. That is more a superstition than anything else, but it is more or less correct, and good, too. We supply the generations with a mass father image and a certain feeling of security. You see all that, don't you?"
Harlan thought: Does the man think I'm still a Cub?
But he nodded briefly.
Finge went on. "There are some things, however, they must not know. Prime among them, of course, is the manner in which we alter Reality when necessary. The insecurity such knowledge would arouse would be most harmful. It is always necessary to breed out of Reality any factors that might lead to such knowledge and we have never been troubled with it.
"However, there are always other undesirable beliefs about Eternity which spring up from time to time in one Century or another. Usually, the dangerous beliefs are those which concentrate particularly in the ruling classes of an era; the classes that have most contact with us and, at the same time, carry the important weight of what is called public opinion."
Finge paused as though he expected Harlan to offer some comment or ask some question. Harlan did neither.
Finge continued. "Ever since the Reality Change 433-486, Serial Number F-2, which took place about a year-a physioyear ago, there has been evidence of the bringing into Reality of such an undesirable belief. I have come to certain conclusions about the nature of that belief and have presented them to the Allwhen Council. The Council is reluctant to accept them since they depend upon the realization of an alternate in the Computing Pattern of an extremely low probability.
"Before acting on my recommendation, they insist on confirmation by direct Observation. It's a most delicate job, which is why I recalled you, and why Computer Twissell allowed you to be recalled. Another thing I did was to locate a member of the current aristocracy, who thought it would be thrilling or exciting to work in Eternity. I placed her in this office and kept her under close observation to see if she were suitable for our purpose--"
Harlan thought: Close observation! Yes!
Again his anger focused itself on Finge rather than upon the woman.
Finge was still speaking. "By all standards, she is suitable. We will now return her to her Time. Using her dwelling as a base, you will be able to study the social life of her circle. Do you understand now the reason I had the girl here and the reason I want you in her house?"
Harlan said with an almost open irony, "I understand quite well, I assure you."
"Then you will accept this mission."
Harlan left with the fire of battle burning inside his chest. Finge was not going to outsmart him. He was not going to make a fool of him.
Surely it was that fire of battle, the determination to outwit Finge, that caused him to experience an eagerness, almost an exhilaration, at the thought of this next excursion into the 482nd.
Surely it was nothing else.






5. Timer


Noys Lambent's estate was fairly isolated, yet within easy reach of one of the larger cities of the Century. Harlan knew that city well; he knew it better than any of its inhabitants could. In his exploratory Observations into this Reality he had visited every quarter of the city and every decade within the purview of the Section.
He knew the city both in Space and Time. He could piece it together, view it as an organism, living and growing, with its catastrophes and recoveries, its gaieties and troubles. Now he was in a given week of Time in that city, in a moment of suspended animation of its slow life of steel and concrete.
More than that, his preliminary explorations had centered themselves more and more closely about the "perioeci," the inhabitants who were the most important of the city, yet who lived outside the city, in room and relative isolation.
The 482nd was one of the many Centuries in which wealth was unevenly distributed. The Sociologists had an equation for the phenomenon (which Harlan had seen in print, but which he understood only vaguely). It worked itself out for any given Century to three relationships, and for the 482nd those relationships stood near the limits of what could be permitted. Sociologists shook their heads over it and Harlan had heard one say at one time that any further deterioration with new Reality Changes would require "the closest Observation."
Yet there was this to be said for unfavorable relationships in the wealth-distribution equation. It meant the existence of a leisure class and the development of an attractive way of life which, at its best, encouraged culture and grace. As long as the other end of the scale was not too badly off, as long as the leisure classes did not entirely forget their responsibilities while enjoying their privileges, as long as their culture took no obviously unhealthy turn, there was always the tendency in Eternity to forgive the departure from the ideal wealth-distribution pattern and to search for other, less attractive maladjustments.
Against his will Harlan began to understand this. Ordinarily his overnight stays in Time involved hotels in the poorer sections, where a man might easily stay anonymous, where strangers were ignored, where one presence more or less was nothing and therefore did not cause the fabric of Reality to do more than tremble. When even that was unsafe, when there was a good chance that the trembling might pass the critical point and bring down a significant part of the card house of Reality, it was not unusual to have to sleep under a particular hedge in the countryside.
And it was usual to survey various hedges to see which would be least disturbed by farmers, tramps, even stray dogs, during the night.
But now Harlan, at the other end of the scale, slept in a bed with a surface of field-permeated matter, a peculiar welding of matter and energy that entered only the highest economic levels of this society. Throughout Time it was less common than pure matter but more common than pure energy. In any case it molded itself to his body as he lay down, firm when he lay still, yielding when he moved or turned.
Reluctantly he confessed the attraction of such things, and he accepted the wisdom which caused each Section of Eternity to live on the median scale of its Century rather than at its most comfortable level. In that way it could maintain contact with the problems and "feel" of the Century, without succumbing to too close an identification with a sociological extreme.
It is easy, thought Harlan, that first evening, to live with aristocrats.
And just before he fell asleep, he thought of Noys.
He dreamed he was on the Allwhen Council, fingers clasped austerely before him. He was looking down on a small, a very small, Finge, listening in terror to the sentence that was casting him out of Eternity to perpetual Observation of one of the unknown Centuries of the far, far upwhen. The somber words of exile were coming from Harlan's own mouth, and immediately to his right sat Noys Lambent.
He hadn't noticed her at first, but his eyes kept sliding to his right, and his words faltered.
Did no one else see her? The rest of the members of the Council looked steadily forward, except for Twissell. He turned to smile at Harlan, looking through the girl as though she weren't there.
Harlan wanted to order her away, but words were no longer coming out of his mouth. He tried to beat at the girl, but his arm moved sluggishly and she did not move. Her flesh was cold.
Finge was laughing-louder--louder- -and it was Noys Lambent laughing.
Harlan opened his eyes to bright sunlight and stared at the girl in horror for a moment before he remembered where she was and where he was.
She said, "You were moaning and beating the pillow. Were you having a bad dream?"
Harlan did not answer.
She said, "Your bath is ready. So are your clothes. I've arranged to have you join the gathering tonight. It felt queer to step back into my ordinary life after being in Eternity so long."
Harlan felt acutely disturbed at her easy flow of words. He said, "You didn't tell them who I was, I hope."
"Of course not."
Of course not! Finge would have taken care of that little matter by having her lightly psychoed under narcosis, if he felt that necessary. He might not have thought it necessary, however. After all, he had given her "close observation."
The thought annoyed him. He said, "I'd prefer to be left to myself as much as possible."
She looked at him uncertainly a moment or two and left.
Harlan went through the morning ritual of washing and dressing glumly. He had no great hopes of an exciting evening. He would have to say as little as possible, do as little as possible, be a part of the wall as much as possible. His true function was that of a pair of ears and a pair of eyes. Connecting those senses with the final report was his mind, which, ideally, had no other function.
Ordinarily it did not disturb him that, as an Observer, he did not know what he was looking for. An Observer, he had been taught as a Cub, must not have preconceived notions as to what data is desired or what conclusions are expected. The knowledge, it was said, would automatically distort his view, however conscientious he tried to be.
But under the circumstances ignorance was irritating. Harlan suspected strongly that there was nothing to look for, that he was playing Finge's game in some way. Between that and Noys.
He stared savagely at the image of himself cast in three-dimensional accuracy two feet in front of him by the Reflector. The clinging garments of the 482nd, seamless and bright in coloring, made him, he thought, look ridiculous.


Noys Lambent came running to him just after he had finished a solitary breakfast brought to him by a Mekkano.
She said breathlessly, "It's June, Technician Harlan."
He said harshly, "Do not use the title here. What if it is June?"
"But it was February when I joined"-she paused doubtfully-"that place, and that was only a month ago."
Harlan frowned. "What year is it now?"
"Oh, it's the right year."
"Are you sure?"
"I'm quite positive. Has there been a mistake?" She had a disturbing habit of standing quite close to him as they talked and her slight lisp (a trait of the Century rather than of herself personally) gave her the sound of a young and rather helpless child. Harlan was not fooled by that. He drew away.
"No mistake. You've been put here because it's more suitable. Actually, in Time, you have been here all along."
"But how could I?" She looked more frightened still. "I don't remember anything about it. Are there two me's?"
Harlan was far more irritated than the cause warranted. How could he explain to her the existence of micro-changes induced by every interference with Time which could alter individual lives without appreciable effect on the Century as a whole. Even Eternals sometimes forgot the difference between micro-changes (small "c") and Changes (large "c") which significantly altered Reality.
He said, "Eternity knows what it's doing. Don't ask questions." He said it proudly, as though he, himself, were a Senior Computer and had personally decided that June was the proper moment in time and that the micro-change induced by skipping three months could not develop into a Change.
She said, "But then I've lost three months of my life."
He sighed. "Your movements through Time have nothing to do with your physiological age."
"Well, have I or haven't I?"
"Have or haven't what?"
"Lost three months."
"By Time, woman, I'm telling you as plainly as I can. You haven't lost any time out of your life. You can't lose any."
She stepped backward at his shout and then, suddenly, giggled. She said, "You have the funniest accent. Especially when you get angry."
He frowned at her retreating back. What accent? He spoke fiftymillennial as well as anyone in the Section. Better probably.
Stupid girl!
He found himself back at the Reflector staring at his image, which stared back at him, vertical furrows deep between its eyes.
He smoothed them out and thought: I'm not handsome. My eyes are too small and my ears stick out and my chin is too big.
He had never particularly thought about the matter before, but now it occurred to him, quite suddenly, that it would be pleasant to be handsome.


Late at night Harlan added his notes to the conversations he had gathered, while it was all fresh in his mind.
As always in such cases he made use of a molecular recorder of 55th Century manufacture. In shape it was a featureless thin cylinder about four inches long by half an inch in diameter. It was colored a deep but noncommittal brown. It could be easily held in cuff, pocket, or lining, depending on the style of clothing, or, for that matter, suspended from belt, button, or wristband.
However held, wherever kept, it had the capacity of recording some twenty million words on each of three molecular energy levels. With one end of the cylinder connected to a transliterator, resonating efficiently with Harlan's earpiece, and the other end connected field-wise to the small mike at his lips, Harlan could listen and speak simultaneously.
Every sound made during the hours of the "gathering" repeated itself now in his ear, and as he listened, he spoke words that recorded themselves on a second level, co-ordinate with but different from the primary level on which the gathering had been recorded. On this second level he described his own impressions, he ascribed significance, pointed out correlations. Eventually, when he made use of the molecular recorder to write a report, he would have, not simply a sound-forsound recording, but an annotated reconstruction.
Noys Lambent entered. She did not signal her entrance in any way.
Annoyed, Harlan removed lip-piece and earpiece, clipped them to the molecular recorder, placed the whole into its kit, and clasped that shut.
"Why do you act so angry with me?" asked Noys. Her arms and shoulders were bare and her long legs shimmered in faintly luminescent foamite.
He said, "I am not angry. I have no feeling for you at all." At the moment he felt the statement to be rigidly true.
She said, "Are you still working? Surely, you must be tired."
"I can't work if you're here," he replied peevishly.
"You are angry with me. You did not say a word to me all evening."
"I said as little as I could to anybody. I wasn't there to speak." He waited for her to leave.
But she said, "I brought you another drink. You seemed to enjoy one at the gathering and one isn't enough. Especially if you're going to be working."
He noticed the small Mekkano behind her, gliding in on a smooth force-field.
He had eaten sparingly that evening, picking lightly at dishes concerning which he had reported in full in past Observations but which (except for fact-searching nibbles) he had thus far refrained from eating. Against his will, he had liked them. Against his will, he had enjoyed the foaming, light green, peppermint-flavored drink (not quite alcoholic, something else, rather) that was currently fashionable. It had not existed in the Century two physioyears earlier, prior to the latest Reality Change.
He took the second drink from the Mekkano with an austere nod of thanks to Noys.
Now why had a Reality Change which had had virtually no physical effect on the Century brought a new drink into existence? Well, he wasn't a Computer, so there was no use asking himself that question. Besides, even the most detailed possible Computations could never eliminate all uncertainty, all random effects. If that weren't so, there would be no need for Observers.
They were alone together in the house, Noys and himself. Mekkanos were at the height of their popularity these two decades past and would remain so for nearly a decade more in this Reality, so there were no human servants about.
Of course, with the female of the species as economically independent as the male, and able to attain motherhood, if she so wished, without the necessities of physical childbearing, there could be nothing "improper" in their being together alone in the eyes of the 482nd, at least.
Yet Harlan felt compromised.
The girl was stretched out on her elbow on a sofa opposite. Its patterned covering sank beneath her as though avid to embrace her. She had kicked off the transparent shoes she had been wearing and her toes curled and uncurled within the flexible foamite, like the soft paws of a luxuriant cat.
She shook her head and whatever it was that had kept her hair arranged upward away from her ears in intricate intertwinings was suddenly loosened. The hair tumbled about her neck and her bare shoulders became more creamily lovely at the contrast with the black of the hair.
She murmured, "How old are you?"
That he certainly should not have answered. It was a personal question and the answer was none of her business. What he should have said at that point with polite firmness was: May I be left to my work? Instead what he heard himself saying was, "Thirty-two years." He meant physioyears, of course.
She said, "I'm younger than you. I'm twenty-seven. But I suppose I won't always look younger than you. I suppose you'll be like this when I'm an old woman. What made you decide to be thirty-two? Can you change if you wish? Wouldn't you want to be younger?"
"What are you talking about?" Harlan rubbed his forehead to clear his mind.
She said softly, "You live forever. You're an Eternal."
Was it a question or a statement?
He said, "You're mad. We grow old and die like anyone else."
She said, "You can tell me." Her voice was low and cajoling. The fifty-millennial language, which he had always thought harsh and unpleasant, seemed euphonious after all. Or was it merely that a full stomach and the scented air had dulled his ears?
She said, "You can see all Times, visit all places. I so wanted to work in Eternity. I waited the longest time for them to let me. I thought maybe they'd make me an Eternal, and then I found there were only men there. Some of them wouldn't even talk to me because I was a woman. You wouldn't talk to me."
"We're all busy," mumbled Harlan, fighting to keep off something that could only be described as a numb content. "I was very busy."
"But why aren't there more women Eternals?"
Harlan couldn't trust himself to speak. What could he say? That members of Eternity were chosen with infinite care since two conditions had to be met. First, they must be equipped for the job; second, their withdrawal from Time must have no deleterious effect upon Reality.
Reality! That was the word he must not mention under any circumstances. He felt the spinning sensation in his head grow stronger and he closed his eyes for a moment to stop it.
How many excellent prospects had been left untouched in Time because their removal into Eternity would have meant the non-birth of children, the non-death of women and men, non-marriage, non-happenings, non-circumstance that would have twisted Reality in directions the Allwhen Council could not permit.
Could he tell her any of this? Of course not. Could he tell her that women almost never qualified for Eternity because, for some reason he did not understand (Computers might, but he himself certainly did not), their abstraction from Time was from ten to a hundred times as likely to distort Reality as was the abstraction of a man.
(All the thoughts jumbled together in his head, lost and whirling, joined to one another in a free association that produced odd, almost grotesque, but not entirely unpleasant, results. Noys was closer to him now, smiling.)
He heard her voice like a drifting wind. "Oh, you Eternals. You are so secretive. You won't share at all. Make me an Eternal."
Her voice was a sound now that didn't coalesce into separate words, just a delicately modulated sound that insinuated itself into his mind.
He wanted, he longed to tell her: There's no fun in Eternity, lady. We work! We work to plot out all the details of everywhen from the beginning of Eternity to where Earth is empty, and we try to plot out all the infinite possibilities of all the might-have-beens and pick out a might-have-been that is better than what is and decide where in Time we can make a tiny little change to twist the is to the might-be and we have a new is and look for a new might-be, forever, and forever, and that is how it has been since Vikkor Mallansohn discovered the Temporal Field in the 24th, way back in the Primitive 24th and then it was possible to start Eternity in the 27th, the mysterious Mallansohn whom no man knows and who started Eternity, really, and the new might-be, forever and forever and forever andÖ
He shook his head, but the whirligig of thought went on and on in stranger and more jagged breaks and leaps until it jumped into a sudden flash of illumination that persisted for a brilliant second, then died.
That moment steadied him. He grasped for it, but it was gone.
The peppermint drink?
Noys was still closer, her face not quite clear in his gaze. He could feel her hair against his cheek, the warm, light pressure of her breath. He ought to draw away, but-strangely, strangely-he found he did not want to.
"If I were made an EternalÖ" she breathed, almost in his ear, though the words were scarcely heard above the beating of his heart. Her lips were moist and parted. "Wouldn't you like to?"
He did not know what she meant, but suddenly he didn't care. He seemed in flames. He put out his arms clumsily, gropingly. She did not resist, but melted and coalesced with him.
It all happened dreamily, as though it were happening to someone else.
It wasn't nearly as repulsive as he had always imagined it must be. It came as a shock to him, a revelation, that it wasn't repulsive at all.
Even afterward, when she leaned against him with her eyes all soft and smiling a little, he found he had to reach out and stroke her damp hair with slow and trembling delight.
She was entirely different in his eyes now. She was not a woman, not an individual at all. She was suddenly an aspect of himself. She was, in a strange and unexpected way, a part of himself.
The spatio-temporal chart said nothing of this, yet Harlan felt no guilt. It was only the thought of Finge that aroused strong emotion in Harlan's breast. And that wasn't guilt. Not at all.
It was satisfaction, even triumph!


In bed Harlan could not sleep. The lightheadedness had worn off now, but there was still the unusual fact that for the first time in his adult life a grown woman shared his bed.
He could hear her soft breathing and in the ultra-dim glow to which the internal light of the walls and ceiling had been reduced he could see her body as the merest shadow next to his.
He had only to move his hand to feel the warmth and softness of her flesh, and he dared not do that, lest he wake her out of whatever dreaming she might have. It was as though she were dreaming for the two of them, dreaming herself and himself and all that had happened, and as though her waking would drive it all from existence.
It was a thought that seemed a piece of those other queer, unusual thoughts he had experienced just beforeÖ
Those had been strange thoughts, coming to him at a moment between sense and nonsense. He tried to recapture them and could not. Yet suddenly it was very important that he recapture them. For although he could not remember the details, he could remember that, for just an instant, he had understood something.
He was not certain what that something was, but there had been the unearthly clarity of the half-asleep, when more than mortal eye and mind seems suddenly to come to life.
His anxiety grew. Why couldn't he remember? So much had been in his grasp.
For the moment even the sleeping girl beside him receded into the hinterland of his thoughts.
He thought: If I follow the threadÖ I was thinking of Reality and EternityÖ yes, and Mallansohn and the Cub!
He stopped there. Why the Cub? Why Cooper? He hadn't thought of him.
But if he hadn't, then why should he think of Brinsley Sheridan Cooper now?
He frowned! What was the truth that connected all this? What was it he was trying to find? What made him so sure there was something to find?
Harlan felt chilled, for with these questions a distant glow of that earlier illumination seemed to break upon the horizons of his mind and he almost knew.
He held his breath, did not press for it. Let it come.
Let it come.
And in the quiet of that night, a night already so uniquely significant in his life, an explanation and interpretation of events came to him that at any saner, more normal time he would not have entertained for a moment.
He let the thought bud and flower, let it grow until he could see it explain a hundred odd points that otherwise simply remained-odd.
He would have to investigate this, check this, back in Eternity, but in his heart he was already convinced that he knew a terrible secret he was not meant to know.
A secret that embraced all Eternity!






6. Life-Plotter


A month of physiotime had passed since that night in the 482nd, when he grew acquainted with many things. Now, if one calculated by ordinary time, he was nearly 2000 Centuries in Noys Lambent's future, attempting by a mixture of bribery and cajolery to learn what lay in store for her in a new Reality.
It was worse than unethical, but he was past caring. In the physiomonth just gone he had, in his own eyes, become a criminal. There was no way of glossing over that fact. He would be no more a criminal by compounding his crime and he had a great deal to gain by doing so.
Now, as part of his felonious maneuvering (he made no effort to choose a milder phrase) he stood at the barrier before the 2456th. Entry into Time was much more complicated than mere passage between Eternity and the kettle shafts. In order to enter Time the coordinates fixing the desired region on Earth's surface had painstakingly to be adjusted and the desired moment of Time pin-pointed within the Century. Yet despite inner tension Harlan handled the controls with the ease and quick confidence of a man with much experience and a great talent.
Harlan found himself in the engine room he had seen first on the viewing screen within Eternity. At this physiomoment Sociologist Voy would be sitting safely before that screen watching for the Technician's Touch that was to come.
Harlan felt no hurry. The room would remain empty for the next 156 minutes. To be sure, the spatio-temporal chart allowed him only 110 minutes, leaving the remaining 46 as the customary 40 per cent "margin." Margin was there in case of necessity, but a Technician was not expected to have to use it. A "margin-eater" did not remain a Specialist long.
Harlan, however, expected to use no more than 2 minutes of the iio. Wearing his wrist-borne field generator so that he was surrounded by an aura of physiotime (an effluvium, so to speak, of Eternity) and therefore protected from any of the effects of Reality Change, he took one step toward the wall, lifted a small container from its position on a shelf, and placed it in a carefully adjusted spot on the shelf below.
Having done that, he re-entered Eternity in a way that seemed as prosaic to himself as passage through any door might be. Had there been a Timer watching, it would have seemed to him that Harlan had simply disappeared.
The small container stayed where he put it. It played no immediate role in world history. A man's hand, hours later, reached for it but did not find it. A search revealed it half an hour later still, but in the interim a force-field had blanked out and a man's temper had been lost. A decision which would have remained unmade in the previous Reality was now made in anger. A meeting did not take place; a man who would have died lived a year longer, under other circumstances; another who would have lived died somewhat sooner.
The ripples spread wider, reaching their maxium in the 2481st, which was twenty-five Centuries upwhen from the Touch. The intensity of the Reality Change declined thereafter. Theorists pointed out that nowhere to the infinite upwhen could the Change ever become zero, but by fifty Centuries upwhen from the Touch the Change had become too small to detect by the finest Computing, and that was the practical limit.
Of course no human being in Time could ever possibly be aware of any Reality Change having taken place. Mind changed as well as matter and only Eternals could stand outside it all and see the change.


Sociologist Voy was staring at the bluish scene in the 2481st, where earlier there had been all the activity of a busy space-port. He barely looked up when Harlan entered. He barely mumbled something that might have been a greeting.
A change had indeed blasted the space-port. Its shininess was gone; what buildings there stood were not the grand creations they had been. A space-ship rusted. There were no people. There was no motion.
Harlan allowed himself a small smile that flickered for a moment, then vanished. It was M.D.R. all right. Maximum Desired Response. And it had happened at once. The Change did not necessarily take place at the precise moment of the Technician's Touch. If the calculations that went into the Touch were sloppy, hours or days might elapse before the Change actually took place (counting, of course, by physiotime). It was only when all degrees of freedom vanished that the Change took place. While there was even a mathematical chance for alternate actions, the Change did not take place.
It was Harlan's pride that when he calculated an M.N.C., when it was his hand that contrived the Touch, the degrees of freedom vanished at once, and the Change took place instantly.
Voy said softly, "It had been very beautiful."
The phrase grated Harlan's ears, seeming to detract from the beauty of his own performance. "I wouldn't regret," he said, "having spacetravel bred out of Reality altogether."
"No?" said Voy.
"What good is it? It never lasts more than a millennium or two. People get tired. They come back home and the colonies die out. Then after another four or five millennia, or forty or fifty, they try again and it fails again. It is a waste of human ingenuity and effort."
Voy said dryly, "You're quite a philosopher."
Harlan flushed. He thought: What's the use in talking to any of them? He said, angrily, with a sharp change of subject, "What about the Life-Plotter?"
"What about him?"
"Would you check with the man? He ought to have made some progress by now."
The Sociologist let a look of disapproval drift across his face, as though to say: You're the impatient one, aren't you? Aloud he said, "Come with me and let's see."


The name plate on the office door said Neron Feruque, which struck Harlan's eye and mind because of its faint similarity to a pair of rulers in the Mediterranean area during Primitive times. (His weekly discourses with Cooper had sharpened his own preoccupation with the Primitive almost feverishly.)
The man, however, resembled neither ruler, as Harlan recalled it. He was almost cadaverously lean, with skin stretched tightly over a high-bridged nose. His fingers were long and his wrists knobby. As he caressed his small Summator, he looked like Death weighing a soul in the balance.
Harlan found himself staring at the Summator hungrily. It was the heart and blood of Life-Plotting, the skin and bones, sinew, muscle and all else. Feed into it the required data of a personal history, and the equations of the Reality Change; do that and it would chuckle away in obscene merriment for any length of time from a minute to a day, and then spit out the possible companion lives for the person involved (under the new Reality), each neatly ticketed with a probability value.
Sociologist Voy introduced Harlan. Feruque, having stared in open annoyance at the Technician's insigne, nodded his head and let the matter go.
Harlan said, "Is the young lady's Life-Plot complete yet?"
"It is not. I'll let you know when it is." He was one of those who carried contempt for the Technician to the point of open rudeness.
Voy said, "Take it easy, Life-Plotter."
Feruque had eyebrows which were light almost to invisibility. It heightened the resemblance of his face to a skull. His eyes rolled in what should have been empty sockets as he said, "Killed the spaceships?"
Voy nodded. "Cut it down a Century."
Feruque's lips twisted softly and formed a word.
Harlan folded his arms and stared at the Life-Plotter, who looked away in eventual discomfiture.
Harlan thought: He knows it's his guilt too.
Feruque said to Voy, "Listen, as long as you're here, what in Time am I going to do about the anti-cancer serum requests? We're not the only Century with anti-cancer. Why do we get all the applications?"
"All the other Centuries are just as crowded. You know that."
"Then they've got to stop sending in applications altogether."
"How do we go about making them?"
"Easy. Let the Allwhen Council stop receiving them."
"I have no pull with the Allwhen Council."
"You have pull with the old man."
Harlan listened to the conversation dully, without real interest. At least it served to keep his mind on inconsequentials and away from the chuckling Summator. The "old man," he knew, would be the Computer in charge of the Section.
"I've talked to the old man," said the Sociologist, "and he's talked to the Council."
"Nuts. He's just sent through a routine tape-strip. He has to fight for this. It's a matter of basic policy."
"The Allwhen Council isn't in the mood these days to consider changes in basic policy. You know the rumors going round."
"Oh, sure. They're busy on a big deal. Whenever there's dodging to do, the word gets round that Council's busy on some big deal."
(If Harlan could have found the heart for it, he would have smiled at that point.)
Feruque brooded a few moments, and then burst out, "What most people don't understand is that anti-cancer serum isn't a matter of tree seedlings or field motors. I know that every sprig of spruce has to be watched for adverse effects on Reality, but anti-cancer always involves a human life and that's a hundred times as complicated.
"Consider! Think how many people a year die of cancer in each Century that doesn't have anti-cancer serums of one sort or another. You can imagine how many of the patients want to die. So the Timer governments in every Century are forever forwarding applications to Eternity to 'please, pretty please ship them seventy-five thousand ampules of serum on behalf of the men critically stricken who are absolutely vital to the cultures, enclosed see biographical data.'"
Voy nodded rapidly, "I know. I know."
But Feruque was not to be denied his bitterness. "So you read the biographical data and it's every man a hero. Every man an insupportable loss to his world. So you work it through. You see what would happen to Reality if each man lived, and for Time's sake, if different combinations of men lived.
"In the last month, I've done 572 cancer requests. Seventeen, count them, seventeen Life-Plots came out to involve no undesirable Reality Changes. Mind you, there wasn't one case of a possible desirable Reality Change, but the Council says neutral cases get the serum. Humanity, you know. So exactly seventeen people in assorted Centuries get cured this month.
"And what happens? Are the Centuries happy? Not on your life. One man gets cured and a dozen, same country, same Time, don't. Everyone says, Why that one? Maybe the guys we didn't treat are better characters, maybe they're rosy-cheeked philanthropists beloved by all, while the one man we cure kicks his aged mother all around the block whenever he can spare the time from beating his kids. They don't know about Reality Changes and we can't tell them.
"We're just making trouble for ourselves, Voy, unless the Allwhen Council decides to screen all applications and approve only those which result in a desirable Reality Change. That's all. Either curing them does some good for humanity, or else it's out. Never mind this business of saying: 'Well, it does no harm.'"
The Sociologist had been listening with a look of mild pain on his face, and now he said, "If it were you with cancerÖ"
"That's a stupid remark, Voy. Is that what we base decisions on? In that case there'd never be a Reality Change. Some poor sucker always gets it in the neck, doesn't he? Suppose you were that sucker, hey?
"And another thing. Just remember that every time we make a Reality Change it's harder to find a good next one. Every physioyear, the chance that a random Change is likely to be for the worse increases. That means the proportion of guys we can cure gets smaller anyway. It's always going to get smaller. Someday, we'll be able to cure only one guy a physioyear, even counting the neutral cases. Remember that."
Harlan lost even the faintest interest. This was the type of griping that went with the business. The Psychologists and Sociologists, in their rare introvertive studies of Eternity, called it identification. Men identified themselves with the Century with which they were associated professionally. Its battles, all too often, became their own battles.
Eternity fought the devil of identification as best it could. No man could be assigned to any Section within two Centuries of his homewhen, to make identification harder. Preference was given to Centuries with cultures markedly different from that of their homewhen. (Harlan thought of Finge and the 482nd.) What was more, their assignments were shifted as often as their reactions grew suspect. (Harlan wouldn't give a 5oth Century grafenpiece for Feruque's chances of retaining this assignment longer than another physioyear at the outside.)
And still men identified out of a silly yearning for a home in Time (the Time-wish; everyone knew about it). For some reason this was particularly true in Centuries with space-travel. It was something that should be investigated and would be but for Eternity's chronic reluctance to turn its eyes inward.
A month earlier Harlan might have despised Feruque as a blustering sentimentalist, a petulant oaf who eased the pain of watching the electro-gravitics lose intensity in a new Reality by railing against those of other Centuries who wanted anti-cancer serum.
He might have reported him. It would have been his duty to do so. The man's reactions obviously could no longer be trusted.
He could not do so, now. He even found sympathy for the man. His own crime was so much greater.
How easy it was to slip back to thoughts of Noys.


Eventually he had fallen asleep that night, and he awoke in daylight, with brightness shining through translucent walls all about until it was as though he had awakened on a cloud in a misty morning sky.
Noys was laughing down at him. "Goodness, it was hard to wake you."
Harlan's first reflexive action was a scrabble for bedclothes that weren't there. Then memory arrived and he stared at her hollowly, his face burning red. How should he feel about this?
But then something else occurred to him and he shot to a sitting position. "It isn't past one, is it? Father Time!"
"It's only eleven. You've got breakfast waiting and lots of time."
"Thanks," he mumbled.
"The shower controls are all set and your clothes are all ready."
What could he say? "Thanks," he mumbled.
He avoided her eyes during the meal. She sat opposite him, not eating, her chin buried in the palm of one hand, her dark hair combed thickly to one side and her eyelashes preternaturally long.
She followed every gesture he made while he kept his eyes lowered and searched for the bitter shame he knew he ought to feel.
She said, "Where will you be going at one?"
"Aeroball game," he muttered, "I have the ticket."
"That's the rubber game. And I missed the whole season because of just skipping the time, you know. Who'll win the game, Andrew?"
He felt oddly weak at the sound of his first name. He shook his head curtly and tried to look austere. (It used to have been so easy.)
"But surely you know. You've inspected this whole period, haven't you?"
Properly speaking, he ought to maintain a flat and cold negative, but weakly he explained, "There was a lot of Space and Time to cover. I wouldn't know little precise things like game scores."
"Oh, you just don't want to tell me."
Harlan said nothing to that. He inserted the pene-prong into the small, juicy fruit and lifted it, whole, to his lips.
After a moment Noys said, "Did you see what happened in this neighborhood before you came?"
"No details, N-noys." (He forced her name past his lips.)
The girl said softly, "Didn't you see us? Didn't you know all along that-"
Harlan stammered, "No, no, I couldn't see myself.I'm not in Rea-- I'm not here till I come. I can't explain." He was doubly flustered. First, that she should speak of it. Second, that he had almost been trapped into saying, "Reality," of all the words the most forbidden in conversation with Timers.
She lifted her eyebrows and her eyes grew round and a little amazed. "Are you ashamed?"
"What we did was not proper."
"Why not?" And in the 482nd her question was perfectly innocent. "Aren't Eternals allowed to?" There was almost a joking cast to that question as though she were asking if Eternals weren't allowed to eat.
"Don't use the word," said Harlan. "As a matter of fact, we're not, in a way."
"Well, then, don't tell them. I won't."
And she walked about the table and sat down on his lap, pushing the small table out of the way with a smooth and flowing motion of her hip.
Momentarily he stiffened, lifted his hands in a gesture that might have been intended to hold her off. It didn't succeed.
She bent and kissed him on his lips, and nothing seemed shameful any more. Nothing that involved Noys and himself.


He wasn't sure when first he began to do something that an Observer, ethically, had no right to do. That is, he began to speculate on the nature of the problem involving the current Reality and of the Reality Change that would be planned.
It was not the loose morals of the Century, not ectogenesis, not matriarchy, that disturbed Eternity. All of that was as it was in the previous Reality and the Allwhen Council had viewed it with equanimity then. Finge had said it was something very subtle.
The Change then would have to be very subtle and it would have to involve the group he was Observing. So much seemed obvious.
It would involve the aristocracy, the well-to-do, the upper classes, the beneficiaries of the system.
What bothered him was that it would most certainly involve Noys.
He got through the remaining three days called for in his chart in a gathering cloud that dampened even his joy in Noys's company.
She said to him, "What happened? For a while, you seemed all different from the way you were in Eter-in that place. You weren't stiff at all. Now, you seem concerned. Is it because you have to go back?"
Harlan said, "Partly."
"Do you have to?"
"I have to."
"Well, who would care if you were late?"
Harlan almost smiled at that. "They wouldn't like me to be late," he said, yet thought longingly just the same of the two-day margin allowed for in his chart.
She adjusted the controls of a musical instrument that played soft and complicated strains out of its own creative bowels by striking notes and chords in a random manner; the randomness weighted in favor of pleasant combinations by intricate mathematical formulae. The music could no more repeat itself than could snowflakes, and could no more fail of beauty.
Through the hypnosis of sound Harlan gazed at Noys and his thoughts wound tightly about her. What would she be in the new dispensation? A fishwife, a factory girl, the mother of six, fat, ugly, diseased? Whatever she was, she would not remember Harlan. He would have been no part of her life in a new Reality. And whatever she would be then, she would not be Noys.
He did not simply love a girl. (Strangely, he used the word "love" in his own thoughts for the first time and did not even pause long enough to stare at the strange thing and wonder at it.) He loved a complex of factors; her choice of clothes, her walk, her manner of speech, her tricks of expression. A quarter century of life and experience in a given Reality had gone into the manufacture of all that. She had not been his Noys in the previous Reality of a physioyear earlier. She would not be his Noys in the next Reality.
The new Noys might, conceivably, be better in some ways, but he knew one thing very definitely. He wanted this Noys here, the one he saw at this moment, the one of this Reality. If she had faults, he wanted those faults, too.
What could he do?
Several things occurred to him, all illegal. One of them was to learn the nature of the Change and find out definitely how it would affect Noys. One could not, after all, be certain thatÖ


A dead silence wrenched Harlan out of his reverie. He was in the Life-Plotter's office once more. Sociologist Voy was watching him out of the corner of his eye. Feruque's death's-head was lowering at him.
And the silence was piercing.
It took a moment for the significance to penetrate. Just a moment. The Summator had ceased its inner clucking.
Harlan jumped up. "You have the answer, Life-Plotter."
Feruque looked down at the flimsies in his hand. "Yeah. Sure. Sort of funny."
"May I have it?" Harlan held out his hand. It was trembling visibly.
"There's nothing to see. That's what's funny."
"What do you mean-nothing?" Harlan stared at Feruque with eyes that suddenly smarted till there was only a tall, thin blur where Feruque stood.
The Life-Plotter's matter-of-fact voice sounded thin. "The dame doesn't exist in the new Reality. No personality shift. She's just out, that's all. Gone. I ran the alternatives down to Probability 0.0001. She doesn't make it anywhere. In fact"-and he reached up to rub his cheek with long, spare fingers-"with the combination of factors you handed me I don't quite see how she fit in the old Reality."
Harlan hardly heard "But-but the Change was such a small one."
"I know. A funny combination of factors. Here, you want the flimsies?"
Harlan's hand closed over them, unfeeling. Noys gone? Noys nonexistent? How could that be?
He felt a hand on his shoulder and Voy's voice clashed on his ear. "Are you ill, Technician?" The hand drew away as though it already regretted its careless contact with a Technician's body.
Harlan swallowed and with an effort composed his features. "I'm quite well. Would you take me to the kettle?"
He _must not_ show his feelings. He must act as though this were what he represented it to be, a mere academic investigation. He must disguise the fact that with Noys's nonexistence in the new Reality he was almost physically overwhelmed by a flood of pure elation, unbearable joy.






7. Prelude to Crime


Harlan stepped into the kettle at the 2456th and looked backward to make certain that the barrier that separated the shaft from Eternity was truly flawless; that Sociologist Voy was not watching. In these last weeks it had grown to be a habit with him, an automatic twitch; there was always the quick backward glance across the shoulder to make sure no one was behind him in the kettle shafts.
And then, though already in the 2456th, it was for upwhen that Harlan set the kettle controls. He watched the numbers on the temporometer rise. Though they moved with blurry quickness, there would be considerable time for thought.
How the Life-Plotter's finding changed matters! How the very nature of his crime had changed!
And it had all hinged on Finge. The phrase caught at him with its ridiculous rhyme and its heavy beat circled dizzyingly inside his skull: It hinged on Finge. It hinged on FingeÖ


Harlan had avoided any personal contact with Finge on his return to Eternity after those days with Noys in the 482nd. As Eternity closed in about him, so did guilt. A broken oath of office, which seemed nothing in the 482nd, was enormous in Eternity.
He had sent in his report by impersonal air-chute and took himself off to personal quarters. He needed to think this out, gain time to consider and grow accustomed to the new orientation within himself.
Finge did not permit it. He was in communication with Harlan less than an hour after the report had been coded for proper direction and inserted into the chute.
The Computer's image stared out of the vision plate. His voice said, "I expected you to be in your office."
Harlan said, "I delivered the report, sir. It doesn't matter where I wait for a new assignment."
"Yes?" Finge scanned the roll of foil he held in his hands, holding it up, squint-eyed, and peering at its perforation pattern.
"It is scarcely complete," he went on. "May I visit your rooms?"
Harlan hesitated a moment. The man was his superior and to refuse the self-invitation at this moment would have a flavor of insubordination. It would advertise his guilt, it seemed, and his raw, painful conscience dared not permit that.
"You will be welcome, Computer," he said stiffly.


Finge's sleek softness introduced a jarring element of epicureanism into Harlan's angular quarters. The 95th, Harlan's homewhen, tended toward the Spartan in house furnishings and Harlan had never completely lost his taste for the style. The tubular metal chairs had been surfaced with a dull veneer that had been artificially grained into the appearance of wood (though not very successfully). In one corner of the room was a small piece of furniture that represented an even wider departure from the customs of the times.
It caught Finge's eye almost at once.
The Computer put a pudgy finger on it, as though to test its texture. "What is this material?"
"Wood, sir," said Harlan.
"The real thing? Actual wood? Amazing! You use wood in your homewhen, I believe?"
"We do."
"I see. There's nothing in the rules against this, Technician"-he dusted the finger with which he had touched the object against the side seam of his trouser leg-"but I don't know that it's advisable to allow the culture of the homewhen to affect one. The true Eternal adopts whatever culture he is surrounded by. I doubt, for instance, if I have eaten out of an energic utensil more than twice in five years." He sighed. "And yet to allow food to touch matter has always seemed unclean. But I don't give in. I don't give in."
His eyes returned to the wooden object, but now he held both hands behind his back, and said, "What is it? What is its purpose?"
"It's a bookcase," said Harlan. He had the impulse to ask Finge how he felt now that his hands rested firmly upon the small of his back. Would he not consider it cleaner to have his clothes and his own body constructed of pure and undefiled energy fields?
Finge's eyebrows lifted. "A bookcase. Then those objects resting upon the shelves are books. Is that right?"
"Yes, sir."
"Authentic specimens?"
"Entirely, Computer. I picked them up in the 24th. The few I have here date from the 20th. If-if you intend to look at them, I wish you'd be careful. The pages have been restored and impregnated, but they're not foil. They take careful handling."
"I won't touch them. I have no intention of touching them. Original 20th Century dust is on them, I imagine. Actual books!" He laughed. "Pages of cellulose, too? You implied that."
Harlan nodded. "Cellulose modified by the impregnation treatment for longer life. Yes." He opened his mouth for a deep breath, forcing himself to remain calm. It was ridiculous to identify himself with these books, to feel a slur upon them to be a slur upon himself.
"I dare say," said Finge, still on the subject, "that the whole content of those books could be placed on two meters of film and stored in a finger's end. What do the books contain?"
Harlan said, "They are bound volumes of a news magazine of the 20th."
"You read that?"
Harlan said proudly, "These are a few volumes of the complete collection I have. No library in Eternity can duplicate it."
"Yes, your hobby. I remember now you once told me about your interest in the Primitive. I'm amazed your Educator ever allowed you to grow interested in such a thing. A complete waste of energy."
Harlan's lips thinned. The man, he decided, was deliberately trying to irritate him out of possession of calm reasoning faculties. If so, he must not be allowed to succeed.
Harlan said flatly, "I think you've come to see me about my report."
"Yes, I have." The Computer looked about, selected a chair, and sat down gingerly. "It is not complete, as I said over the communicator."
"In what way, sir?" (Calm! Calm!)
Finge broke into a nervous twitch of a smile. "What happened that you didn't mention, Harlan?"
"Nothing, sir." And though he said it firmly, he stood there, hangdog.
"Come, Technician. You spent several periods of time in the society of the young lady. Or you did if you followed the spatio-temporal chart. You did follow it, I suppose?"
Harlan's guilt riddled him to the point where he could not even rise to the bait of this open assault upon his professional competence.
He could only say, "I followed it."
"And what happened? You include nothing of the private interludes with the woman."
"Nothing of importance happened," said Harlan, dry-lipped.
"That is ridiculous. At your time of life and with your experience, I don't have to tell you that it is not for an Observer to judge what is important and what is not."
Finge's eyes were keenly upon Harlan. They were harder and more eager than quite befitted his soft line of questioning.
Harlan noted that well and was not fooled by Finge's gentle voice, yet the habit of duty tugged at him. An Observer must report everything. An Observer was merely a sense-perceptive pseudopod thrust out by Eternity into Time. It tested its surroundings and was drawn back. In the fulfillment of his function an Observer had no individuality of his own; he was not really a man.
Almost automatically Harlan began his narration of the events he had left out of his report. He did it with the trained memory of the Observer, reciting the conversations with word-for-word accuracy, re constructing the tone of voice and cast of countenance. He did it lovingly, for in the telling he lived it again, and almost forgot, in the process, that a combination of Finge's probing and his own healing sense of duty was driving him into an admission of guilt.
It was only as he approached the end result of that first long conversation that he faltered and the shell of his Observer's objectivity showed cracks.
He was saved from further details by the hand that Finge suddenly raised and by the Computer's sharp, edgy voice. "Thank you. It is enough. You were about to say that you made love to the woman."
Harlan grew angry. What Finge said was the literal truth, but Finge's tone of voice made it sound lewd, coarse, and, worse than that, commonplace. Whatever else it was, or might be, it was not commonplace.
Harlan had an explanation for Finge's attitude, for his anxious cross-examination, for his breaking off the verbal report at the moment he did. Finge was jealous! That much Harlan would have sworn was obvious. Harlan had succeeded in taking away a girl that Finge had meant to have.
Harlan felt the triumph in that and found it sweet. For the first time in his life he knew an aim that meant more to him than the frigid fulfillment of Eternity. He was going to keep Finge jealous, because Noys Lambent was to be permanently his.
In this mood of sudden exaltation he plunged into the request that originally he had planned to present only after a wait of a discreet four or five days.
He said, "It is my intention to apply for permission to form a liaison with a Timed individual."
Finge seemed to snap out of a reverie. "With Noys Lambent, I presume."
"Yes, sir. As Computer in charge of the Section, it will have to go through youÖ"
Harlan wanted it to go through Finge. Make him suffer. If he wanted the girl himself, let him say so and Harlan could insist on allowing Noys to make her choice. He almost smiled at that. He hoped it would come to that. It would be the final triumph.
Ordinarily, of course, a Technician could not hope to push through such a matter in the face of a Computer's desires, but Harlan was sure he could count on Twissell's backing, and Finge had a long way to go before he could buck Twissell.
Finge, however, seemed tranquil. "It would seem," he said, "that you have already taken illegal possession of the girl."
Harlan flushed and was moved to a feeble defense. "The spatio-temporal chart insisted on our remaining alone together. Since nothing of what happened was specifically forbidden, I feel no guilt."
Which was a lie, and from Finge's half-amused expression one could feel that he knew it to be a lie.
He said, "There will be a Reality Change."
Harlan said, "If so, I will amend my application to request liaison with Miss Lambent in the new Reality."
"I don't think that would be wise. How can you be sure in advance? In the new Reality, she may be married, she may be deformed. In fact I can tell you this. In the new Reality, she will not want you. She will not want you."
Harlan quivered. "You know nothing about it."
"Oh? You think this great love of yours is a matter of soul-to-soul contact? That it will survive all external changes? Have you been reading novels out of Time?"
Harlan was goaded into indiscretion. "For one thing, I don't believe you.,,
Finge said coldly, "I beg pardon."
"You're lying." Harlan didn't care what he said now. "You're jealous. It's all it amounts to. You're jealous. You had your own plans for Noys but she chose me."
Finge said, "Do you realize-"
"I realize a great deal. I'm no fool. I may not be a Computer, but neither am I an ignoramus. You say she won't want me in the new Reality. How do you know? You don't even know yet what the new Reality will be. You don't know if there must be a new Reality at all. You just received my report. It must be analyzed before a Reality Change can be computed, let alone submitted for approval. So when you affect to know the nature of the Change, you are lying."
There were a number of ways in which Finge might have made response. Harlan's heated mind was aware of many. He did not try to choose among them. Finge might stalk out in affected dudgeon; he might call in a member of Security and have Harlan taken into custody for insubordination; he might shout back, yelling as angrily as Harlan; he might put in an immediate call to Twissell, lodging a formal complaint; he might-he mightÖ
Finge did none of this.
He said gently, "Sit down, Harlan. Let's talk about this."
And because that response was completely unexpected, Harlan's jaw sagged and he sat down in confusion. His resolution faltered. What was this?
"You remember, of course," said Finge, "that I told you that our problem with the 482nd involved an undesirable attitude on the' part of the Timers of the current Reality toward Eternity. You do remember that, don't you?" He spoke with the mild urging of a schoolmaster toward a somewhat backward student, yet Harlan thought he could detect a kind of hard glitter in his eye.
Harlan said, "Of course."
"You remember, too, that I told you that the Allwhen Council was reluctant to accept my analysis of the situation without specific confirming Observations. Doesn't that imply to you that I had already Computed the necessary Reality Change?"
"But my own Observations represent the confirmation, don't they?"
"They do."
"And it would take time to analyze them properly."
"Nonsense. Your report means nothing. The confirmation lay in what you told me orally moments ago."
"I don't understand you."
"Look, Harlan, let me tell you what is wrong with the 482nd. Among the upper classes of this Century, particularly among the women, there has grown up the notion that Eternals are really Eternal, literally so; that they live foreverÖ Great Time, man, Noys Lambent told you as much. You repeated her statements to me not twenty minutes ago."
Harlan stared blankly at Finge. He was remembering Noys's soft, caressing voice as she leaned toward him and caught at his eyes with her own lovely, dark glance: _You live forever. You're an Eternal_.
Finge went on, "Now a belief like that is bad, but, in itself, not too bad. It can lead to inconveniences, increase difficulties for the Section, but Computation would show that only in a minority of cases would Change be necessary. Still, if a Change is desirable, isn't it obvious to you that the inhabitants of the Century who must, above all, change maximally with the Change, be those who are subject to the superstition. In other words, the female aristocracy. Noys."
"It may be, but I'll take my chance," said Harlan.
"You have no chance at all. Do you think your fascinations and charm persuaded the soft aristocrat to fall into the arms of an unimportant Technician? Come, Harlan, be realistic about this."
Harlan's lips grew stubborn. He said nothing.
Finge said, "Can't you guess the additional superstition which these people have added to their belief in the actual eternal life of the Eternals? Great Time, Harlan! Most of the women believe that intimacy with an Eternal will enable a mortal woman (as they think of themselves) to live forever!"
Harlan swayed. He could hear Noys's voice again so clearly: _If I were made an Eternal_Ö
And then her kisses.
Finge went on. "The existence of such a superstition was hard to believe, Harlan. It was unprecedented. It lay within the region of random error so that a search through the Computations for the previous Change yielded no information respecting it one way or the other. The Allwhen Council wanted firm evidence, direct substantiation. I chose Miss Lambent as a good example of her class. I chose you as the other subject--"
Harlan struggled to his feet. "You chose me? As a subject?"
"I'm sorry," said Finge stiffly, "but it was necessary. You made a very good subject."
Harlan stared at him.
Finge had the grace to squirm a bit under that wordless stare. He said, "Don't you see? No, you still don't. Look, Harlan, you're a coldfish product of Eternity. You won't look at a woman. You consider women and all that concerns t.hem unethical. No, there's a better word. You consider them sinful. That attitude shows all over you, and to any woman you'd have all the sex appeal of a month-dead mackerel. Yet here we have a woman, a beautiful pampered product of a hedonistic culture, who ardently seduces you on your first evening together, virtually begging for your embrace. Don't you understand that that is ridiculous, impossible, unless-well, unless it is the confirmation we were looking for."
Harlan struggled for words. "You say she sold herself--"
"Why that expression? There is no shame attached to sex in this Century. The only strange thing is that she chose you as partner, and that she did for the sake of eternal life. It's plain."
And Harlan, arms raised, hands claw-bent, with no rational thought in his mind, or any irrational one other than to choke and throttle Finge, sprang forward.
Finge stepped back hastily. He brought out a blaster with a quick, trembling gesture. "Don't touch me! Back!"
Harlan had just enough sanity to halt his rush. His hair was matted. His shirt was stained with perspiration. His breath whistled through pinched white nostrils.
Finge said shakily, "I know you very well, you see, and I thought your reaction might be violent. Now I'll shoot if I have to."
Harlan said, "Get out."
"I will. But first you'll listen. For attacking a Computer, you can be declassified, but we'll let that go. You will understand, however, that I did not lie. The Noys Lambent of the new Reality, whatever else may be or not be, will lack this superstition. The whole purpose of the Change will be to wipe out the superstition. And without it, Harlan"- his voice was almost a snarl-"how could a woman like Noys want a man like you?"
The pudgy Computer backed toward the door of Harlan's personal quarters, blaster still leveled.
He paused to say, with a sort of grim gaiety, "Of course, if you had her now, Harlan, if you had her now, you could enjoy her. You could keep your liaison and make it formal. That is, if you had her now. But the Change will come soon, Harlan, and after that, you will not have her. What a pity, the now does not last, even in Eternity, eh, Harlan?"
Harlan no longer looked at him. Finge had won after all and was leaving in clear and leering possession of the field. Harlan stared unseeingly at his own toes, and when he looked up Finge was gone- whether five seconds earlier or fifteen minutes Harlan could not have said.


Hours had passed nightmarishly and Harlan felt trapped in the prison of his mind. All that Finge had said was so true, so transparently true. Harlan's Observer mind could look back upon the relationship of himself and Noys, that short, unusual relationship, and it took on a different texture.
It wasn't a case of instant infatuation. How could he have believed it was? Infatuation for a man like himself?
Of course not. Tears stung his eyes and he felt ashamed. How obvious it was that the affair was a case of cool calculation. The girl had certain undeniable physical assets and no ethical principles to keep her from using them. So she used them and that had nothing to do with Andrew Harlan as a person. He simply represented her distorted view of Eternity and what it meant.
Automatically Harlan's long fingers caressed the volumes in his small bookshelf. He took one out and, unseeingly, opened it.
The print blurred. The faded colors of the illustrations were ugly, meaningless blotches.
Why had Finge troubled to tell him all this? In the strictest sense he ought not to have. An Observer, or anyone acting as Observer, ought never to know the ends attained by his Observation. It removed him by so much from the ideal position of the objective non-human tool.
It was to crush him, of course; to take a mean and jealous revenge!
Harlan fingered the open page of the magazine. He found himself staring at a duplication, in startling red, of a ground vehicle, similar to vehicles characteristic of the 45th, 182nd, 590th, and 984th Centuries, as well as of late Primitive times. It was a very common sort of affair with an internal-combustion motor. In the Primitive era natural petroleum fractions were the source of power and natural rubber cushioned the wheels. That was true of none of the later centuries, of course.
Harlan had pointed that out to Cooper. He had made quite a point of it, and now his mind, as though longing to turn away from the unhappy present, drifted back to that moment. Sharp, irrelevant images filled the ache within Harlan.
"These advertisements," he had said, "tell us more of Primitive times than the so-called news articles in the same magazine. The news articles assume a basic knowledge of the world it deals with. It uses terms it feels no necessity of explaining. What is a 'golf ball,' for instance?"
Cooper had professed his ignorance readily.
Harlan went on in the didactic tone he could scarcely avoid on occasions such as this. "We could deduce that it was a small pellet of some sort from the nature of the casual mentions it receives. We know that it is used in a game, if only because it is mentioned in an item under the heading 'Sport.' We can even make further deductions that it is hit by a long rod of some sort and that the object of the game is to drive the ball into a hole in the ground. But why bother with deduction and reasoning? Observe this advertisement! The object of it is only to induce readers to buy the ball, but in so doing we are presented with an excellent close-range portrait of one, with a section cut into it to show its construction."
Cooper, coming from an era in which advertisement was not as wildly proliferative as it was in the later Centuries of Primitive times, found all this difficult to appreciate. He said, "Isn't it rather disgusting the way these people blow their own horn? Who would be fool enough to believe a person's boastings about his own products? Would he admit defects? Is he likely to stop at any exaggeration?"
Harlan, whose homewhen was middling fruitful in advertisement, raised tolerant eyebrows and merely said, "You'll have to accept that. It's their way and we never quarrel with the ways of any culture as long as it does not seriously harm mankind as a whole."
But now Harlan's mind snapped back to his present situation and he was back in the present, staring at the loudmouthed, brassy advertisements in the news magazine. He asked himself in sudden excitement: Were the thoughts he had just experienced really irrelevant? Or was he tortuously finding a way out of the blackness and back to Noys?
Advertisement! A device for forcing the unwilling into line. Did it matter to a ground-vehicle manufacturer whether a given individual felt an original or spontaneous desire for his product? If the prospect (that was the word) could be artificially persuaded or cajoled into feeling that desire and acting upon it, would that not be just as well?
Then what did it matter if Noys loved him out of passion or out of calculation? Let them but be together long enough and she would grow to love him. He would make her love him and, in the end, love and not its motivation was what counted. He wished now he had read some of the novels out of Time that Finge had mentioned scornfully.
Harlan's fists clenched at a sudden thought. If Noys had come to him, to Harlan, for immortality, it could only mean that she had not yet fulfilled the requirement for that gift. She could have made love to no Eternal previously. That meant that her relationship to Finge had been nothing more than that of secretary and employer. Otherwise what need would she have had for Harlan?
Yet Finge surely must have tried-must have attemptedÖ (Harlan could not complete the thought even in the secrecy of his own mind.) Finge could have proved the superstition's existence on his own person. Surely he could not have missed the thought with Noys an everpresent temptation. Then she must have refused him.
He had had to use Harlan and Harlan had succeeded. It was for that reason that Finge had been driven into the jealous revenge of torturing Harlan with the knowledge that Noys's motivation had been a practical one, and that he could never have her.
Yet Noys had refused Finge even with eternal life at stake and had accepted Harlan. She had that much of a choice and she had made it in Harlan's favor. 'So it wasn't calculation entirely. Emotion played a part.
Harlan's thoughts were wild and jumbled, and grew more heated with every moment.
He must have her, and now. Before any Reality Change. What was it Finge had said to him, jeering: _The now does not last, even in Eternity_.
Doesn't it, though? Doesn't it?
Harlan had known exactly what he must do. Finge's angry taunting had goaded him into a frame of mind where he was ready for crime and Finge's final sneer had, at least, inspired him with the nature of the deed he must commit.
He had not wasted a moment after that. It was with excitement and even joy that he left his quarters, at all but a run, to commit a major crime against Eternity.






8. Crime


No one had questioned him. No one had stopped him. There was that advantage, anyway, in the social isolation of a Technician. He went via the kettle channels to a door to Time and set its controls. There was the chance, of course, that someone would happen along on a legitimate errand and wonder why the door was in use. He hesitated, and then decided to stamp his seal on the marker. A sealed door would draw little attention. An unsealed door in active use would be a nine-day wonder.
Of course, it might be Finge who stumbled upon the door. He would have to chance that.
Noys was still standing as he had left her. Wretched hours (physiohours) had passed since Harlan had left the 482nd for a lonely Eternity, but he returned now to the same Time, within a matter of seconds, that he had left. Not a hair on Noys's head had stirred.
She looked startled. "Did you forget something, Andrew?"
Harlan stared at her hungrily, but made no move to touch her. He remembered Finge's words, and he dared not risk a repulse. He said stiffly, "You've got to do as I say."
She said, "But is something wrong, then? You just left. You just this minute left."
"Don't worry," said Harlan. It was all he could do to keep from taking her hand, from trying to soothe her. Instead he spoke harshly. It was as though some demon were forcing him to do all the wrong things. Why had he come back at the first available moment? He was only disturbing her by his almost instantaneous return after leaving.
(He knew the answer to that, really. He had a two-day margin of grace allowed by the spatio-temporal chart. The earlier portions of that period of grace were safer and yielded least chance of discovery. It was a natural tendency to crowd it as far downwhen as he could. A foolish risk, too, though. He might easily have miscalculated and entered Time before he had left it physiohours earlier. What then? It was one of the first rules he had learned as an Observer: One person occupying two points in the same Time of the same Reality runs a risk of meeting himself.
Somehow that was something to be avoided. Why? Harlan knew he didn't want to meet himself. He didn't want to be staring into the eyes of another and earlier (or later) Harlan. Beyond that it would be a paradox, and what was it Twissell was fond of saying? "There are no paradoxes in Time, but only because Time deliberately avoids paradoxes.")
All the time Harlan thought dizzily of all this Noys stared at him with large, luminous eyes.
Then she came to him and put cool hands on either burning cheek and said softly, "You're in trouble."
To Harlan her glance seemed kindly, loving. Yet how could that be? She had what she wanted. What else was there? He seized her wrists and said huskily, "Will you come with me? Now? Without asking any questions? Doing exactly as I say?"
"Must I?" she asked.
"You must, Noys. It's very important."
"Then I'll come." She said it matter-of-factly, as though such a request came to her each day and was always accepted.


At the lip of the kettle Noys hesitated a moment, then stepped in.
Harlan said, "We're going upwhen, Noys."
"That means the future, doesn't it?"
The kettle was already faintly humming as she entered it and she was scarcely seated when Harlan unobtrusively moved the contact at his elbow.
She showed no signs of nausea at the beginnings of that indescribable sensation of "motion" through Time. He was afraid she might.
She sat there quietly, so beautiful and so at ease that he ached, looking at her, and gave not the particle of a damn that, by bringing a Timer, unauthorized, into Eternity, he had committed a felony.
She said, "Does that dial show the numbers of the years, Andrew?"
"The Centuries."
"You mean we're a thousand years in the future? Already?"
"That's right."
"It doesn't feel like it."
"I know."
She looked about. "But how are we moving?"
"I don't know, Noys."
"You don't?"
"There are many things about Eternity that are hard to understand."
The numbers on the temporometer marched. Faster and faster they moved till they were a blur. With his elbow Harlan had nudged the speed stick to high. The power drain might cause some surprise in the power plants, but he doubted it. No one had been waiting for him in Eternity when he returned with Noys, and that was nine tenths the battle. Now it was only necessary to get her to a safe place.
Again Harlan looked at her. "Eternals don't know everything."
"And I'm not an Eternal," she murmured. "I know so little."
Harlan's pulse quickened. Still not an Eternal? But Finge saidÖ
Leave it at that, he pleaded with himself. Leave it at that. She's coming with you. She smiles at you. What more do you want?
But he spoke anyway. He said, "You think an Eternal lives forever, don't you?"
"Well, they call them Etemals, you know, and everyone says they do." She smiled at him brightly. "But they don't, do they?"
"You don't think so, then?"
"After I was in Eternity a while, I didn't. People didn't talk as though they lived forever, and there were old men there."
"Yet you told me I lived forever-that night."
She moved closer to him along the seat, still smiling. "I thought: who knows?"
He said, without being quite able to keep the strain out of his voice, "How does a Timer go about becoming an Eternal?"
Her smile vanished and was it his imagination or was there a trace of heightened color in her cheek. She said, "Why do you ask that?"
"To find out."
"It's silly," she said. "I'd rather not talk about it." She stared down at her graceful fingers, edged with nails that glittered colorlessly in the muted light of the kettle shaft. Harlan thought abstractedly and quite apropos of nothing that at an evening gathering, with a touch of mild ultraviolet in the wall illumination, those nails would glow a soft apple-green or a brooding crimson, depending on the angle she held her hands. A clever girl, one like Noys, could produce half a dozen shades out of them, and make it seem as though the colors were reflecting her moods. Blue for innocence, bright yellow for laughter, violet for sorrow, and scarlet for passion.
He said, "Why did you make love to me?"
She shook her hair back and looked at him out of a pale, grave face. She said, "If you must know, part of the reason was the theory that a girl can become an Eternal that way. I wouldn't mind living forever."
"I thought you said you didn't believe that."
"I didn't, but it couldn't hurt a girl to take the chance. Especially--"
He was staring at her sternly, finding refuge from hurt and disappointment in a frozen look of disapproval from the heights of the morality of his homewhen. "Well?"
"Especially since I wanted to, anyway."
"Wanted to make love to me?"
"Yes."
"Why me?"
"Because I liked you. Because I thought you were funny."
"Funny!"
"Well, odd, if you like that better. You always worked so hard not to look at me, but you always looked at me anyway. You tried to hate me and I could see you wanted me. I was sorry for you a little, I think."
"What were you sorry about?" Ue felt his cheeks burning.
"That you should have such trouble about wanting me. It's such a simple thing. You just ask a girl. It's so easy to be friendly. Why suffer?"
Harlan nodded. The morality of the 482nd! "Just ask a girl," he muttered. "So simple. Nothing more necessary."
"The girl has to be willing, of course. Mostly she is, if she's not otherwise engaged. Why not? It's simple enough."
It was Harlan's turn to drop his eyes. Of course, it was simple enough. And nothing wrong with it, either. Not in the 482nd. Who in Eternity should know this better? He would be a fool, an utter and unspeakable fool, to ask her now about earlier affairs. He might as well ask a girl of his own homewhen if she had ever eaten in the presence of a man and how dared she?
Instead he said humbly, "And what do you think of me now?"
"That you are very nice," she said softly, "and that if you ever relaxed- Won't you smile?"
"There's nothing to smile about, Noys."
"Please. I want to see if your cheeks can crease right. Let's see." She put her fingers to the corners of his mouth and pressed them backward. He jerked his head back in surprise and couldn't avoid smiling.
"See. Your cheeks didn't even crack. You're almost handsome. With enough practice-standing in front of a mirror and smiling and getting a twinkle in your eye-I'll bet you could be really handsome."
But the smile, fragile enough to begin with, vanished.
Noys said, "We are in trouble, aren't we?"
"Yes, we are, Noys. Great trouble."
"Because of what we did? You and I? That evening?"
"Not really."
"That was my fault, you know. I'll tell them so, if you wish."
"Never,", said Harlan with energy. "Don't take on any fault in this. You've done nothing, nothing, to be guilty for. It's something else."
Noys looked uneasily at the temporometer. "Where are we? I can't even see the numbers."
"When are we?" Harlan corrected her automatically. He slowed the velocity and the Centuries came into view.
Her beautiful eyes widened and the lashes stood out against the whiteness of her skin. "Is that right?"
Harlan looked at the indicator casually. It was in the 72,000's. "I'm sure it is."
"But where are we going?"
"To when are we going. To the far upwhen," he said, grimly. "Good and far. Where they won't find you."
And in silence they watched the numbers mount. In silence Harlan told himself over and over that the girl was innocent of Finge's charge. She had owned up frankly to its partial truth and she had admitted, just as frankly, the presence of a more personal attraction.
He looked up, then, as Noys shifted position. She had moved to his side of the kettle and, with a resolute gesture, brought the kettle to a halt at a most uncomfortable temporal deceleration.
Harlan gulped and closed his eyes to let the nausea pass. He said, "What's the matter?"
She looked ashen and for a moment made no reply. Then she said, "I don't want to go any further. The numbers are so high."
The temporometer read: 111,394.
He said, "Far enough."
Then he held out his hand gravely, "Come, Noys. This will be your home for a while."


They wandered through the corridors like children, hand in hand. The lights along the mainways were on, and the darkened rooms blazed at the touch of a contact. The air was fresh and had a liveliness about it which, without sensible draft, yet indicated the presence of ventilation.
Noys whispered, "Is there no one here?"
"No one," said Harlan. He tried to say it firmly and loudly. He wanted to break the spell of being in a "Hidden Century," but he said it in only a whisper after all.
He did not even know how to refer to anything so far upwhen. To call it the one-one-one-three-ninety-fourth was ridiculous. One would have to say simply and indefinitely, "The hundred thousands."
It was a foolish problem to be concerned with, but now that the exaltation of actual flight was done with, he found himself alone in a region of Eternity where no human footsteps had wandered and he did not like it. He was ashamed, doubly ashamed since Noys was witness, at the fact that the faint chill within him was the faint chill of a faint fear.
Noys said, "It's so clean. There's no dust."
"Self-cleaning," said Harlan. With an effort that seemed to tear at his vocal cords he raised his voice to near-normal level. "But no one's here, upwhen or downwhen for thousands and thousands of Centuries."
Noys seemed to accept that. "And everything is fixed up so? We passed food stores and a viewing-film library. Did you see that?"
"I saw that. Oh, it's fully equipped. They're all fully equipped. Every Section."
"But why, if no one ever comes here?"
"It's logical," said Harlan. Talking about it took away some of the eeriness. Saying out loud what he already knew in the abstract would pin-point the matter, bring it down to the level of the prosaic. He said, "Early in the history of Eternity, one of the Centuries in the 300's came up with a mass duplicator. Do you know what I mean? By setting up a resonating field, energy could be converted to matter with subatomic particles taking up precisely the same pattern of positions, within the uncertainty requirements, as those in the model being used. The result is an exact copy.
"We in Eternity commandeered the instrument for our own purposes. At that time, there were only about six or seven hundred Sections built up. We had plans for expansion, of course. 'Ten new Sections a physioyear' was one of the slogans of the time. The mass duplicator made that all unnecessary. We built one new Section complete with food, power supply, water supply, all the best automatic features; set up the machine and duplicated the Section once each Century all along Eternity. I don't know how long they kept it going-millions of Centuries, probably."
"All like this, Andrew?"
"All exactly like this. And as Eternity expands, we just fill in, adapting the construction to whatever fashion turns out to be current in the Century. The only troubles come when we hit an energy-centered Century. We-we haven't reached this Section yet." (No use telling her that the Eternals couldn't penetrate into Time here in the Hidden Centuries. What difference did that make?)
He glanced at her and she seemed troubled. He said hastily, "There's no waste involved in building the Sections. It took energy, nothing more, and with the nova to draw on-"
She interrupted. "No. I just don't remember."
"Remember what?"
"You said the duplicator was invented in the 300's. We don't have it in the 482nd. I don't remember viewing anything about it in history."
Harlan grew thoughtful. Although she was within two inches of being as tall as himself, he suddenly felt giant-size by comparison. She was a child, an infant, and he was a demigod of Eternity who must teach her and lead her carefully to the truth.
He said, "Noys, dear, let's find a place to sit down and-and I'll have to explain something."


The concept of a variable Reality, a Reality that was not fixed and eternal and immutable was not one that could be faced casually by anyone.
In the dead of the sleep period, sometimes, Harlan would remember the early days of his Cubhood and recall the wrenching attempts to divorce himself from his Century and from Time.
It took six months for the average Cub to learn all the truth, to discover that he could never go home again in a very literal way. It wasn't Eternity's law, alone, that stopped him, but the frigid fact that home as he knew it might very well no longer exist, might, in a sense, never have existed.
It affected Cubs differently. Harlan remembered Bonky Latourette's face turning white and gaunt the day Instructor Yarrow had finally made it unmistakably clear about Reality.
None of the Cubs ate that night. They huddled together in search of a kind of psychic warmth, all except Latourette, who had disappeared. There was a lot of false laughter and miserably poor joking.
Someone said with a voice that was tremulous and uncertain, "I suppose I never had a mother. If I go back into the 95th, they'd say: 'Who are you? We don't know you. We don't have any records of you. You don't exist.'"
They smiled weakly and nodded their heads, lonely boys with nothing left but Eternity.
They found Latourette at bedtime, sleeping deeply and breathing shallowly. There was the slight reddening of a spray injection in the hollow of his left elbow and fortunately that was noted too.
Yarrow was called and for a while it looked as though one Cub would be out of the course, but he was brought around eventually. A week later he was back in his seat. Yet the mark of that evil night was on his personality for as long as Harlan knew him thereafter.
And now Harlan had to explain Reality to Noys Lambent, a girl not much older than those Cubs, and explain it at once and in full. He had to. There was no choice about that. She must learn exactly what faced them and exactly what she would have to do.
He told her. They ate canned meats, chilled fruits, and milk at a long conference table designed to hold twelve, and there he told her.
He did it as gently as possible, but he scarcely found need for gentleness. She snapped quickly at every concept and before he was half through it was borne in upon him, to his great amazement, that she wasn't reacting badly. She wasn't afraid. She showed no sense of loss. She only seemed angry.
The anger reached her face and turned it a glowing pink while her dark eyes seemed somehow the darker for it.
"But that's criminal," she said. "Who are the Eternals to do this?"
"It's done for humanity's good," said Harlan. Of course, she couldn't really understand that. He felt sorry for the Time-bound thinking of a Timer.
"Is it? I suppose that's how the mass duplicator was wiped out."
"We have copies still. Don't worry about that. We've preserved it."
"You've preserved it. But what about us? We of the 482nd might have had it." She gestured with little movements of two clenched fists.
"It wouldn't have done you good. Look, don't be excited, dear, and listen." With an almost convulsive gesture (he would have to learn how to touch her naturally, without making the movement seem a sheepish invitation to a repulse) he took her hands in his and held them tightly.
For a moment she tried to free them, and then she relaxed. She even laughed a bit. "Oh, go ahead, silly, and don't look so solemn. I'm not blaming you."
"You mustn't blame anyone. There is no blame necessary. We do what must be done. That mass duplicator is a classic case. I studied it in school. When you duplicate mass, you can duplicate persons, too. The problems that arise are very complicated."
"Isn't it up to the society to solve its own problems?"
"It is, but we studied that society throughout Time and it doesn't solve the problem satisfactorily. Remember that its failure to do so affects not only itself but all its descendant societies. In fact, there is no satisfactory solution to the mass-duplicator problem. It's one of those things like atomic wars and dreamies that just can't be allowed. Developments are never satisfactory."
"What makes you so sure?"
"We have our Computing machines, Noys; Computaplexes far more accurate than any ever developed in any single Reality. These Compute the possible Realities and grade the desirabilities of each over a summation of thousands and thousands of variables."
"Machines!" She said it with scorn.
Harlan frowned, then relented hastily. "Now don't be like that. Naturally, you resent learning that life is not as solid as you thought. You and the world you lived in might have been only a probability shadow a year ago, but what's the difference? You have all your memories, whether they're of probability shadows or not, haven't you? You remember your childhood and your parents, don't you?"
"Of course."
"Then it's just as if you lived it, isn't it? Isn't it? I mean, whether you did or not?"
"I don't know. I'll have to think about it. What if tomorrow it's a dream world again, or a shadow, or whatever you call it?"
"Then there would be a new Reality and a new you with new memories. It would be just as though nothing had happened, except that the sum of human happiness would have been increased again."
"I don't find that satisfying, somehow."
"Besides," said Harlan hastily, "nothing will happen to you now. There will be a new Reality but you're in Eternity. You won't be changed."
"But you say it makes no difference," said Noys gloomily. "Why go to all the trouble?"
With sudden ardor Harlan said, "Because I want you as you are. Exactly as you are. I don't want you changed. Not in anyway."
He came within a hair of blurting out the truth, that without the advantage of the superstition about Eternals and eternal life she would never have inclined toward him.
She said, looking about with a slight frown, "Will I have to stay here forever, then? It would be-lonely."
"No, no. Don't think it," he said wildly, gripping her hands so tight that she winced. "I'll find out what you will be in the new Reality of the 482nd, and you'll go back in disguise, so to speak. I'll take care of you. I'll apply for permission for formal liaison and see to it that you remain safely through future Changes. I'm a Technician and a good one and I know about Changes." He added grimly, "And I know a few other things as well," and stopped there.
Noys said, "Is all this allowed? I mean, can you take people into Eternity and keep them from changing? It doesn't sound right, somehow, from the things you've told me."
For a moment Harlan felt shrunken and cold in the large emptiness of the thousands of Centuries that surrounded him upwhen and down. For a moment he felt cut off even from the Eternity that was his only home and only faith, doubly cast out from Time and Eternity; and only the woman for whom he had forsaken it all left at his side.
He said, and he meant it deeply, "No, it is a crime. It is a very great crime, and I am bitterly ashamed. But I would do it again, if I had to, and any number of times, if I had to."
"For me, Andrew? For me?"
He did not raise his eyes to hers. "No, Noys, for myself. I could not bear to lose you."
She said, "And if we are caughtÖ"
Harlan knew the answer to that. He knew the answer since that moment of insight in bed in the 482nd, with Noys sleeping at his side. But, even yet, he dared not think of the wild truth.
He said, "I am not afraid of anyone. I have ways of protecting myself. They don't imagine how much I know."






9. Interlude


It was, looking back at it, an idyllic period that followed. A hundred things took place in those physioweeks, and all confused itself inextricably in Harlan's memory, later, making the period seem to have lasted much longer than it did. The one idyllic thing about it was, of course, the hours he could spend with Noys, and that cast a glow over everything else.
Item One: At the 482nd he slowly packed his personal effects; his clothing and films, most of all his beloved and tenderly handled newsmagazine volumes out of the Primitive. Anxiously he supervised their return to his permanent station in the 575th.
Finge was at his elbow as the last of it was lifted into the freight kettle by Maintenance men.
Finge said, choosing his words with unerring triteness, "Leaving us, I see." His smile was broad, but his lips were carefully held together so that only the barest trace of teeth showed. He kept his hands clasped behind his back and his pudgy body teetered forward on the balls of his feet.
Harlan did not look at his superior. He muttered a monotoned "Yes, sir."
Finge said, "I will report to Senior Computer Twissell concerning the entirely satisfactory manner in which you performed your Observational duties in the 482nd."
Harlan could not bring himself to utter even a sullen word of thanks. He remained silent.
Finge went on, in a suddenly much lower voice, "I will not report, for the present, your recent attempt at violence against me." And although his smile remained and his glance remained mild, there was a relish of cruel satisfaction about him.
Harlan looked up sharply and said, "As you wish, Computer."


Item Two: He re-established himself at the 575th.
He met Twissell almost at once. He found himself happy to see that little body, topped by that lined and gnomelike face. He was even happy to see the white cylinder nestling smokily between two stained fingers and being lifted rapidly toward Twissell's lips.
Harlan said, "Computer."
Twissell, emerging from his office, looked for a moment unseeingly and unrecognizingly at Harlan. His face was haggard and his eyes squinted with weariness.
He said, "Ah, Technician Harlan. You are done with your work in the 482nd?"
"Yes, sir."
Twissell's comment was strange. He looked at his watch, which, like any watch in Eternity, was geared to physiotime, giving the day number as well as the time of day, and said, "On the nose, my boy, on the nose. Wonderful. Wonderful."
Harlan felt his heart give a small bound. When he had last seen Twissell he would not have been able to make sense of that remark. Now he thought he did. Twissell was tired, or he would not have spoken so close to the core of things, perhaps. Or the Computer might have felt the remark to be so cryptic as to feel safe despite its closeness to the core.
Harlan said, speaking ascasually as he could to avoid letting it seem that his remark had any connection at all with what Twissell had just said, "How's my Cub?"
"Fine, fine," said Twissell, with only half his mind, apparently, on his words. He took a quick puff at the shortening tube of tobacco, indulged in a quick nod of dismissal, and hurried off.


Item Three: the Cub.
He seemed older. There seemed to be a greater feeling of maturity to him as he held out his hand and said, "Glad to see you back, Harlan."
Or was it merely that, where earlier Harlan had been conscious of Cooper only as a pupil, he now seemed more than a Cub. He now seemed a gigantic instrument in the hands of the Eternals. Naturally he could not help but attain a new stature in Harlan's eyes.
Harlan tried not to show that. They were in Harlan's own quarters, and the Technician basked in the creamy porcelain surfaces about him, glad to be out of the ornate splash of the 482nd. Try as he might to associate the wild baroque of the 482nd with Noys, he only succeeded in associating it with Finge. With Noys he associated a pink, satiny twilight and, strangely, the bare austerity of the Sections of the Hidden Centuries.
He spoke hastily, almost as though he were anxious to hide his dangerous thoughts. "Well, Cooper, what have they been doing with you while I was away?"
Cooper laughed, brushed his drooping mustache self-consciously with one finger and said, "More math. Always math."
"Yes? Pretty advanced stuff by now, I guess."
"Pretty advanced."
"How's it coming?"
"So far it's bearable. It comes pretty easy, you know. I like it. But now they're really loading it on."
Harlan nodded and felt a certain satisfaction. He said, "Temporal Field matrices and all that?"
But Cooper, his color a little high, turned toward the stacked volumes in the bookshelves, and said, "Let's get back to the Primitives. I've got some questions."
"About what?"
"City life in the 23rd. Los Angeles, especially."
"Why Los Angeles?"
"It's an interesting city. Don't you think so?"
"It is, but let's hit it in the 21st, then. It was at its peak in the 21st."
"Oh, let's try the 23rd."
Harlan said, "Well, why not?"
His face was impassive, but if the impassiveness could have been peeled off, there would have been a grimness about him. His grand, intuitional guess was more than a guess. Everything was checking neatly.


Item Four: research. Twofold research.
For himself, first. Each day, with ferreting eyes, he went through the reports on Twissell's desk. The reports concerned the various Reality Changes being scheduled or suggested. Copies went to Twissell routinely since he was a member of the Allwhen Council, and Harlan knew he would not miss one. He looked first for the coming Change in the 482nd. Secondly he looked for other Changes, any other Changes, that might have a flaw, an imperfection, some deviation from maximum excellence that might be visible to his own trained and talented Technician's eyes.
In the strictest sense of the word the reports were not for his study, but Twissell was rarely in his office these days, and no one else saw fit to interfere with Twissell's personal Technician.
That was one part of his research. The other took place in the 575th Section branch of the library.
For the first time he ventured out of those portions of the library which, ordinarily, monopolized his attention. In the past he had haunted the section on Primitive history (very poor indeed, so that most of his references and source materials had to be derived from the far downwhen of the 3rd millennium, as was only natural, of course). To an even greater extent he had ransacked the shelves devoted to Reality Change, its theory, technique, and history; an excellent collection (best in Eternity outside the Central branch itself, thanks to Twissell) of which he had made himself full master.
Now he wandered curiously among the other film-racks. For the first time he Observed (in the capital-O sense) the racks devoted to the 575th itself; its geographies, which varied little from Reality to Reality, its histories, which varied more, and its sociologies, which varied still more. These were not the books or reports written about the Century by Observing and Computing Eternals (with those he was familiar), but by the Timers themselves.
There were the works of literature of the 575th and these stirred memories of tremendous arguments he had heard of concerning the values of alternate Changes. Would this masterpiece be altered or not? If so, how? How did past Changes affect works of art?
For that matter, could there ever be general agreement about art? Could it ever be reduced to quantitative terms amenable to mechanical evaluation by the Computing machines?
A Computer named August Sennor was Twissell's chief opponent in these matters. Harlan, stirred by Twissell's feverish denunciations of the man and his views, had read some of Sennor's papers and found them startling.
Sennor asked publicly and, to Harlan, disconcertingly, whether a new Reality might not contain a personality within itself analogous to that of a man who had been withdrawn into Eternity in a previous Reality. He analyzed then the possibility of an Eternal meeting his analogue in Time, either with or without knowing it, and speculated on the results in each case. (That came fairly close to one of Eternity's most potent fears, and Harlan shivered and hastened uneasily through the discussion.) And, of course, he discussed at length the fate of literature and art in various types and classifications of Reality Changes.
But Twissell would have none of the last. "If the values of art can't be computed," he would shout at Harlan, "then what's the use of arguing about it?"
And Twissell's views, Harlan knew, were shared by the large majority of the Allwhen Council.
Yet now Harlan stood at the shelves devoted to the novels of Eric Linkollew, usually described as the outstanding writer of the 575th, and wondered. He counted fifteen different "Complete Works" collections, each, undoubtedly, taken out of a different Reality. Each was somewhat different, he was sure. One set was noticeably smaller than all the others, for instance. A hundred Sociologists, he imagined, must have written analyses of the differences between the sets in terms of the sociological background of each Reality, and earned status thereby.
Harlan passed on to the wing of the library which was devoted to the devices and instrumentation of the various 575th's. Many of these last, Harlan knew, had been eliminated in Time and remained intact, as a product of human ingenuity, only in Eternity. Man had to be protected from his own too flourishing technical mind. That more than anything else. Not a physioyear passed but that somewhere in Time nuclear technology veered too close to the dangerous and had to be steered away.
He returned to the library proper and to the shelves on mathematics and mathematical histories. His fingers skimmed across individual titles, and after some thought he took half a dozen from the shelves and signed them out.


Item Five: Noys.
That was the really important part of the interlude, and all the idyllic part.
In his off-hours, when Cooper was gone, when he might ordinarily have been eating in solitude, reading in solitude, sleeping in solitude, waiting in solitude for the next day-he took to the kettles.
With all his heart he was grateful for the Technician's position in society. He was thankful, as he had never dreamed he could be, for the manner in which he was avoided.
No one questioned his right to be in a kettle, nor cared whether he aimed it upwhen or down. No curious eyes followed him, no willing hands offered to help him, no chattering mouths discussed it with him.
He could go where and when he pleased.
Noys said, "You've changed, Andrew. Heavens, you've changed."
He looked at her and smiled. "In what way, Noys?"
"You're smiling, aren't you? That's one of the ways. Don't you ever look in a mirror and see yourself smiling?"
"I'm afraid to. I'd say: 'I can't be that happy. I'm sick. I'm delirious. I'm confined in an asylum, living in daydreams, and unaware of it.'"
Noys leaned close to pinch him. "Feel anything?"
He drew her head toward him, felt bathed in her soft, black hair.
When they separated, she said breathlessly, "You've changed there, too. You've become very good at it."
"I've got a good teacher," began Harlan, and stopped abruptly, fearing that would imply displeasure at the thought of the many who might have had the making of such a good teacher.
But her laugh seemed untroubled by such a thought. They had eaten and she looked silky-smooth and warmly soft in the clothing he had brought her.
She followed his eyes and fingered the skirt gently, lifting it loose from its soft embrace of her thigh. She said, "I wish you wouldn't, Andrew. I really wish you wouldn't."
"There's no danger," he said carelessly.
"There is danger. Now don't be foolish. I can get along with what's here, until-until you make arrangements."
"Why shouldn't you have your own clothes and doodads?"
"Because they're not worth your going to my house in Time and being caught. And what if they make the Change while you're there?"
He evaded that uneasily. "It won't catch me." Then, brightening, "Besides my wrist generator keeps me in physiotime so that a Change can't affect me, you see."
Noys sighed. "I don't see. I don't think I'll ever understand it all."
"There's nothing to it." And Harlan explained and explained with great animation and Noys listened with sparkling eyes that never quite revealed whether she was entirely interested, or amused, or, perhaps, a little of both.
It was a great addition to Harlan's life. There was someone to talk to, someone with whom to discuss his life, his deeds, and thoughts. It was as though she were a portion of himself, but a portion sufficiently separate to require speech in communication rather than thought. She was a portion sufficiently separate to be able to answer unpredictably out of independent thought processes. Strange, Harlan thought, how one might Observe a social phenomenon such as matrimony and yet miss so vital a truth about it. Could he have predicted in advance, for instance, that it would be the passionate interludes that he would later least often associate with the idyl?
She snuggled into the crook of his arm and said, "How is your mathematics coming along?"
Harlan said, "Want to look at a piece of it?"
"Don't tell me you carry it around with you?"
"Why not? The kettle trip takes time. No use wasting it, you know."
He disengaged himself, took a small viewer from his pocket, inserted the film, and smiled fondly as she put it to her eyes.
She returned the viewer to him with a shake of her head. "I never saw so many squiggles. I wish I could read your Standard Intertemporal."
"Actually," said Harlan, "most of the squiggles you mention aren't Intertemporal really, just mathematical notation."
"You understand it, though, don't you?"
Harlan hated to do anything to disillusion the frank admiration in her eyes, but he was forced to say, "Not as much as I'd like to. Still, I have been picking up enough math to get what I want. I don't have to understand everything to be able to see a hole in a wall big enough to push a freight kettle through."
He tossed the viewer into the air, caught it with a flick of his hand, and put it on a small end-table.
Noys's eyes followed it hungrily and sudden insight flashed on Harlan.
He said, "Father Time! You can't read Intertemporal, at that."
"No. Of course not."
"Then the Section library here is useless to you. I never thought of that. You ought to have your own films from the 482nd."
She said quickly, "No. I don't want any."
He said, "You'll have them."
"Honestly, I don't want them. It's silly to risk--"
"You'll have them!" he said.


For the last time he stood at the immaterial boundary separating Eternity from Noys's house in the 482nd. He had intended the time before to be the last time. The Change was nearly upon them now, a fact he had not told Noys out of the decent respect he would have had for anyone's feelings, let alone those of his love.
Yet it wasn't a difficult decision to make, this one additional trip. Partly it was bravado, to shine before Noys, bring her the book-films from out the lion's mouth; partly it was a hot desire (what was the Primitive phrase?) "to singe the beard of the King of Spain," if he might refer to the smooth-checked Finge so.
Then, too, he would have the chance once again of savoring the weirdly attractive atmosphere about a doomed house.
He had felt it before, when entering it carefully during the period of grace allowed by the spatio-temporal charts. He had felt it as he wandered through its rooms, collecting clothing, small _objets d'art_, strange containers, and instruments from Noys's vanity table.
There was the somber silence of a doomed Reality that was past merely the physical absence of noise. There was no way for Harlan to predict its analogue in a new Reality. It might be a small suburban cottage or a tenement in a city street. It might be zero with untamed scrubland replacing the parklike terrain on which it now stood. It might, conceivably, be almost unchanged. And (Harlan touched on this thought gingerly) it might be inhabited by the analogue of Noys or, of course, it might not.
To Harlan the house was already a ghost, a premature specter that had begun its hauntings before it had actually died. And because the house, as it was, meant a great deal to him, he found he resented its passing and mourned it.
Once, only, in five trips had there been any sound to break the stillness during his prowlings. He was in the pantry, then, thankful that the technology of that Reality and Century had made servants unfashionable and removed a problem. He had, he recalled, chosen among the cans of prepared foods, and was just deciding that he had enough for one trip, and that Noys would be pleased indeed to intersperse the hearty but uncolorful basic diet provided in the empty Section with some of her own dietary. He even laughed aloud to think that not long before he had thought her diet decadent.
It was in the middle of the laugh that he heard a distinct clapping noise. He froze!
The sound had come from somewhere behind him, and in the startled moment during which he had not moved the lesser danger that it was a housebreaker occurred to him first and the greater danger of its being an investigating Eternal occurred second.
It couldn't be a housebreaker. The entire period of the spatio-temporal chart, grace period and all, had been painstakingly cleared and chosen out of other similar periods of Time because of the lack of complicating factors. On the other hand, he had introduced a micro-Change (perhaps not so micro at that) by abstracting Noys.
Heart pounding, he forced himself to turn. It seemed to him that the door behind him had just closed, moving the last millimeter required to bring it flush with the wall.
He repressed the impulse to open that door, to search the house. With Noys's delicacies in tow he returned to Eternity and waited two full days for repercussions before venturing into the far upwhen. There were none and eventually he forgot the incident.
But now, as he adjusted the controls to enter Time this one last time, he thought of it again. Or perhaps it was the thought of the Change, nearly upon him now, that preyed on him. Looking back on the moment later on, he felt that it was one or the other that caused him to misadjust the controls. He could think of no other excuse.
The misadjustment was not immediately apparent. It pin-pointed the proper room and Harlan stepped directly into Noys's library.
He had become enough of a decadent himself, now, to be not altogether repelled by the workmanship that went into the design of the film-cases. The lettering of the titles blended in with the intricate filigree until they were attractive but nearly unreadable. It was a triumph of aesthetics over utility.
Harlan took a few from the shelves at random and was surprised. The title of one was _Social and Economic History of our Times_.
Somehow it was a side of Noys to which he had given little thought. She was certainly not stupid and yet it never occurred to him that she might be interested in weighty things. He had the impulse to scan a bit of the _Social and Economic History_, but fought it down. He would find it in the Section library of the 482nd, if he ever wanted it. Finge had undoubtedly rifled the libraries of this Reality for Eternity's records months earlier.
He put that film to one side, ran through the rest, selected the fiction and some of what seemed light non-fiction. Those and two pocket viewers. He stowed them carefully into a knapsack.
It was at that point that, once more, he heard a sound in the house. There was no mistake this time. It was not a short sound of indeterminate origin. It was a langh, a man's laugh. He was not alone in the house.
He was unaware that he had dropped the knapsack. For one dizzy second he could think only that he was trapped!






10. Trapped!


All at once it had seemed inevitable. It was the rawest dramatic irony. He had entered Time one last time, tweaked Finge's nose one last time, brought the pitcher to the well one last time. It had to be then that he was caught.
Was it Finge who laughed?
Who else would track him down, lie in wait, stay a room away, and burst into mirth?
Well, then, was all lost? And because in that sickening moment he was sure all was lost it did not occur to him to run again or to attempt flight into Eternity once more. He would face Finge.
He would kill him, if necessary.
Harlan stepped to the door from behind which the laugh had sounded, stepped to it with the soft, firm step of the premeditated murderer. He flicked loose the automatic door signal and opened it by hand. Two inches. Three. It moved without sound.
The man in the next room had his back turned. The figure seemed too tall to be Finge and that fact penetrated Harlan's simmering mind and kept him from advancing further.
Then, as though the paralysis that seemed to hold both men in rigor was slowly lifting, the other turned, inch by inch.
Harlan never witnessed the completion of that turn. The other's profile had not yet come into view when Harlan, holding back a sudden gust of terror with a last fragment of moral strength, flung himself back out the door. Its mechanism, not Harlan, closed it soundlessly.
Harlan fell back blindly. He could breathe only by struggling violently with the atmosphere, fighting air in and pushing it out, while his heart beat madly as though in an effort to escape his body.
Finge, Twissell, all the Council together could not have disconcerted him so much. It was the fear of nothing physical that had unmanned him. Rather it was an almost instinctive loathing for the nature of the accident that had befallen him.
He gathered the stack of book-films to himself in a formless lump and managed, after two futile tries, to re-establish the door to Eternity. He stepped through, his legs operating mechanically. Somehow he made his way to the 575th, and then to personal quarters. His Technicianhood, newly valued, newly appreciated, saved him once again. The few Eternals he met turned automatically to one side and looked steadfastly over his head as they did so.
That was fortunate, for he lacked any ability to smooth his face out of the death's-head grimace he felt he was wearing, or any power to put the blood back into it. But they didn't look, and he thanked Time and Eternity and whatever blind thing wove Destiny for that.
He had not truly recognized the other man in Noys's house by his appearance, yet he knew his identity with a dreadful certainty.
The first time Harlan had heard a noise in the house he, Harlan, had been laughing and the sound that interrupted his laugh was of something weighty dropping in the next room. The second time someone had laughed in the next room and he, Harlan, had dropped a knapsack of book-films. The first time he, Harlan, had turned and caught sight of a door closing. The second time he, Harlan, closed a door as a stranger turned.
He had met himself!
In the same Time and nearly in the same place he and his earlier self by several physiodays had nearly stood face to face. He had misadjusted the controls, set if for an instant in Time which he had already used and he, Harlan, had seen him, Harlan.


He had gone about his work with the shadow of horror upon him for days thereafter. He cursed himself for a coward, but that did not help.
Indeed from that moment matters took a downward trend. He could put his finger on the Great Divide. The key moment was the instant in which he had adjusted the door controls for his entry into the 482nd for one last time and somehow had adjusted it wrongly. Since then things went badly, badly.
The Reality Change in the 482nd went through during that period of despondency and accentuated it. In the past two weeks he had picked up three proposed Reality Changes which contained minor flaws, and now he chose among them, yet could do nothing to move himself to action.
He chose Reality Change 2456-2781, V-5 for a number of reasons. Of the three, it was farthest upwhen, the most distant. The error was minute, but was significant in terms of human life. It needed, then, only a quick trip to the 2456th to find out the nature of Noys's analogue in the new Reality, by use of a little blackmailing pressure.
But the unmanning of his recent experience betrayed him. It seemed to him no longer a simple thing, this gentle application of threatened exposure. And once he found the nature of Noys's analogue, what then? Put Noys in her place as charwoman, seamstress, laborer, or whatever. Certainly. But what, then, was to be done with the analogue herself? With any husband the analogue might have? Family? Children?
He had thought of none of this earlier. He had avoided the thought. "Sufficient unto the dayÖ"
But now he could think of nothing else.
So he lay skulking in his room, hating himself, when Twissell called him, his tired voice questioning and a little puzzled.
"Harlan, are you ill? Cooper tells me you've skipped several discussion periods."
Harlan tried to smooth the trouble out of his face. "No, Computer Twissell. I'm a little tired."
"Well, that's forgivable, at any rate, boy." And then the smile on his face came about as close as it ever did to vanishing entirely. "Have you heard that the 482nd has been Changed?"
"Yes," said Harlan shortly.
"Finge called me," said Twissell, "and asked that you be told that the Change was entirely successful."
Harlan shrugged, then grew aware of Twissell's eyes staring out of the Communiplate and hard upon him. He grew uneasy and said, "Yes, Computer?"
"Nothing," said Twissell, and perhaps it was the cloak of age weighing down upon his shoulders, but his voice was unaccountably sad. "I thought you were about to speak."
"No," said Harlan. "I had nothing to say."
"Well, then, I'll see you tomorrow at opening in the Computing Room, boy. I have a great deal to say."
"Yes, sir," said Harlan. He stared for long minutes at the plate after it went dark.
That had almost sounded like a threat. Finge had called Twissell, had he? What had he said that Twissell did not report.
But an outside threat was what he needed. Battling a sickness of the spirit was like standing in a quicksand and beating it with a stick. Battling Finge was another thing altogether. Harlan had remembered the weapon at his disposal and for the first time in days felt a fraction of self-confidence return.


It was as though a door had closed and another had opened. Harlan grew as feverishly active as previously he had been catatonic. He traveled to the 2456th and bludgeoned Sociologist Voy to his own exact will.
He did it perfectly. He got the information he sought.
And more than he sought. Much more.
Confidence is rewarded, apparently. There was a homewhen proverb that went: "Grip the nettle firmly and it will become a stick with which to beat your enemy."
In short, Noys had no analogue in the new Reality. No analogue at all. She could take her position in the new society in the most inconspicuous and convenient manner possible, or she could stay in Eternity. There could be no reason to deny him liaison except for the highly theoretical fact that he had broken the law-and he knew very well how to counter that argument.
So he went racing upwhen to tell Noys the great news, to bathe in undreamed-of success after a few days horrible with apparent failure.
And at this moment the kettle came to a halt.
It did not slow; it simply halted. If the motion had been one along any of the three dimensions of space, a halt that sudden would have smashed the kettle, brought its metal to a dull red heat, turned Harlan into a thing of broken bone and wet, crushed flesh.
As it was, it merely doubled him with nausea and cracked him with inner pain.
When he could see, he fumbled to the temporometer and stared at it with fuzzy vision. It read 100,000.
Somehow that frightened him. It was too round a number.
He turned feverishly to the controls. What had gone wrong?
That frightened him too, for he could see nothing wrong. Nothing had tripped the drive-lever. It remained firmly geared into the upwhen drive. There was no short circuit. All the indicator dials were in the black safety range. There was no power failure. The tiny needle that marked the steady consumption of meg-megcoulombs of power calmly insisted that power was being consumed at the usual rate.
What, then, had stopped the kettle?
Slowly, and with considerable reluctance, Harlan touched the drivelever, curled his hand about it. He pushed it to neutral, and the needle on the power gauge declined to zero.
He twisted the drive-lever back in the other direction. Up went the power gauge again, and this time the temporometer flicked downwhen along the line of Centuries.
Downwhen-downwhen-99,983-99,972-99,959- Again Harlan shifted the lever. Upwhen again. Slowly. Very slowly.
Then 99,985-99,993-99,997-99,998-99,999-100,000- Smash! Nothing past 100,000. The power of Nova Sol was silently being consumed, at an incredible rate, to no purpose.
He went downwhen again, farther. He roared upwhen. Smash!
His teeth were clenched, his lips drawn back, his breath rasping. He felt like a prisoner hurling himself bloodily against the bars of a prison.
When he stopped, a dozen smashes later, the kettle rested firmly at 100,000. Thus far, and no farther.
He would change kettles! (But there was not much hope in that thought.)
In the empty silence of the 100,000th Century, Andrew Harlan stepped out of one kettle and chose another kettle shaft at random.
A minute later, with the drive-lever in his hand, he stared at the marking of 100,000 and knew that here, too, he could not pass.
He raged! Now! At this time! When things so unexpectedly had broken in his favor, to come to so sudden a disaster. The curse of that moment of misjudgment in entering the 482nd was still on him.
Savagely he spun the lever downwhen, pressing it hard at maximum and keeping it there. At least in one way he was free now, free to do anything he wanted. With Noys cut off behind a barrier and out of his reach, what more could they do to him? What more had he to fear?
He carried himself to the 575th and sprang from the kettle with a reckless disregard for his surroundings that he had never felt before. He made his way to the Section library, speaking to no one, regarding no one. He took what he wanted without glancing about to see if he were observed. What did he care?
Back to the kettle and downwhen again. He knew exactly what he would do. He looked at the large clock as he passed, measuring off Standard Physiotime, numbering the days and marking off the three coequal work shifts of the physioday. Finge would be at his private quarters now, and that was so much the better.
Harlan felt as though he were running a temperature when he arrived at the 482nd. His mouth was dry and cottony. His chest hurt. But he felt the hard shape of the weapon under his shirt as he held it firmly against his side with one elbow and that was the only sensation that counted.


Assistant Computer Hobbe Finge looked up at Harlan, and the surprise in his eyes slowly gave way to concern.
Harlan watched him silently for a while, letting the concern grow and waiting for it to change to fear. He circled slowly, getting between Finge and the Communiplate.
Finge was partly undressed, bare to the waist. His chest was sparsely haired, his breasts puffy and almost womanish. His tubby abdomen lapped over his waistband.
He looks undignified, thought Harlan with satisfaction, undignified and unsavory. So much the better.
He put his right hand inside his shirt and closed it firmly on the grip of his weapon.
Harlan said, "No one saw me, Finge, so don't look toward the door. No one's coming here. You've got to realize, Finge, that you're dealing with a Technician. Do you know what that means?"
His voice was hollow. He felt angry that fear wasn't entering Finge's eyes, only concern. Finge even reached for his shirt and, without a word, began to put it on.
Harlan went on, "Do you know the privilege of being a Technician, Finge? You've never been one, so you can't appreciate it. It means no one watches where you go or what you do. They all look the other way and work so hard at not seeing you that they really succeed at it. I could, for instance, go to the Section library, Finge, and help myself to any curious thing while the librarian busily concerns himself with his records and sees nothing. I can walk down the residential corridors of the 482nd and anyone passing turns out of my way and will swear later on he saw no one. It's that automatic. So you see, I can do what I want to do, go where I want to go. I can walk into the private apartments of the Assistant Computer of a Section and force him to tell the truth at weapon point and there'll be no one to stop me."
Finge spoke for the first time. "What are you holding?"
"A weapon," said Harlan, and brought it out. "Do you recognize it?" Its muzzle flared slightly and ended in a smooth metallic bulge.
"If you kill meÖ" began Finge.
"I won't kill you," said Harlan. "At a recent meeting you had a blaster. This is not a blaster. It is an invention of one of the past Realities of the 575th. Perhaps you are not acquainted with it. It was bred out of Reality. Too nasty. It can kill, but at low power it activates the pain centers of the nerve system and paralyzes as well. It is called, or was called, a neuronic whip. It works. This one is fully charged. I tested it on a finger." He held up his left hand with its stiffened little finger. "It was very unpleasant."
Finge stirred restlessly. "What is all this about, for Time's sake?"
"There is some sort of a block across the kettle shafts at the 100,000th. I want it removed."
"A block across the shafts?"
"Let's not work away at being surprised. Yesterday you spoke to Twissell. Today there is the block. I want to know what you said to Twissell. I want to know what's been done and what will be done. By Time, Computer, if you don't tell me, I'll use the whip. Try me, if you doubt my word."
"Now listen"-Finge's words slurred a bit and the first edge of fear made its appearance, and also a kind of desperate anger-"if you want the truth, it's this. We know about you and Noys."
Harlan's eyes flickered. "What about myself and Noys?"
Finge said, "Did you think you were getting away with anything?" The Computer kept his eyes fixed on the neuronic whip and his forehead was beginning to glisten. "By Time, with the emotion you showed after your period of Observation, with what you did during the period of Observation, did you think we wouldn't observe you? I would deserve to be broken as Computer if I had missed that. We know you brought Noys into Eternity. We knew it from the first. You wanted the truth. There it is."
At that moment Harlan despised his own stupidity. "You knew?"
"Yes. We knew you had brought her to the Hidden Centuries. We knew every time you entered the 482nd to supply her with appropriate luxuries; playing the fool, with your Eternal's Oath completely forgotten."
"Then why didn't you stop me?" Harlan was tasting the very dregs of his own humiliation.
"Do you still want the truth?" Finge flashed back, and seemed to gain courage in proportion as Harlan sank into frustration.
"Go on."
"Then let me tell you that I didn't consider you a proper Eternal from the start. A flashy Observer, perhaps, and a Technician who went through the motions. But no Eternal. When I brought you here on this last job, it was to prove as much to Twissell, who values you for some obscure reason. I wasn't just testing the society in the person of the girl, Noys. I was testing you, too, and you failed as I thought you would fail. Now put away that weapon, that whip, whatever it is, and get out of here."
"And you came to my personal quarters once," said Harlan breathlessly, working hard to keep his dignity and feeling it slip from him as though his mind and spirit were as stiff and unfeeling as the whiplashed little finger on his left hand, "to goad me into doing what I did."
"Yes, of course. If you want the phrase exactly, I tempted you. I told you the exact truth, that you could keep Noys only in the thenpresent Reality. You chose to act, not as an Eternal, but as a sniveler. I expected you to."
"I would do it again now," said Harlan gruffly, "and since it's all known, you can see I have nothing to lose." He thrust his whip outward toward Finge's plump waistline and spoke through pale lips and clenched teeth. "What has happened to Noys?"
"I have no idea."
"Don't tell me that. What has happened to Noys?"
"I tell you I don't know."
Harlan's fist tightened on the whip; his voice was low. "Your leg first. This will hurt."
"For Time's sake, listen. Wait!"
"All right. What has happened to her?"
"No, listen. So far it's just a breach of discipline. Reality wasn't affected. I made checks on that. Loss of rating is all you'll get. If you kill me, though, or hurt me with intent to kill, you've attacked a superior. There's the death penalty for that."
Harlan smiled at the futility of the threat. In the face of what had already happened death would offer a way out that in finality and simplicity had no equal.
Finge obviously misunderstood the reasons for the smile. He said hurriedly, "Don't think there's no death penalty in Eternity because you've never come across one. We know of them; we Computers. What's more, executions have taken place, too. It's simple. In any Reality, there are numbers of fatal accidents in which bodies are not recovered. Rockets explode in mid-air, aeroliners sink in mid-ocean or crash to powder in mountains. A murderer can be put on one of those vessels minutes, or seconds, before the fatal results. Is this worth that to you?"
Harlan stirred and said, "If you're stalling for rescue, it won't work. Let me tell you this: I'm not afraid of punishment. Furthermore, I intend to have Noys. I want her now. She does not exist in the current Reality. She has no analogue. There is no reason why we cannot establish formal liaison."
"It is against regulations for a Technician--"
"We will let the Allwhen Council decide," said Harlan, and his pride broke through at last. "I am not afraid of an adverse decision, either, any more than I am afraid of killing you. I am no ordinary Technician."
"Because you are Twissell's Technician?" and there was a strange look on Finge's round, sweating face that might have been hatred or triumph or part of each.
Harlan said, "For reasons much more important than that. And nowÖ"
With grim determination he touched finger to the weapon's activator.
Finge screamed, "Then go to the Council. The Allwhen Council; they know. If you are that important--" He ended, gasping.
For a moment Harlan's finger hovered irresolutely. "What?"
"Do you think I would take unilateral action in a case like this? I reported this whole incident to the Council, timing it with the Reality Change. Here! Here are the duplicates."
"Hold on, don't move."
But Finge disregarded that order. With a speed as from the spur of a possessing fiend Finge was at his files. The finger of one hand located the code combination of the record he wanted, the fingers of the other punched it into the file. A silvery tongue of tape slithered out of the desk, its pattern of dots just visible to the naked eye.
"Do you want it sounded?" asked Finge, and without waiting threaded it into the sounder.
Harlan listened, frozen. It was clear enough. Finge had reported in full. He had detailed every motion of Harlan's in the kettle shafts. He hadn't missed one that Harlan could remember up to the point of making the report.
Finge shouted when the report was done, "Now, then, go to the Council. I've put no block in Time. I wouldn't know how. And don't think they're unconcerned about the matter. You said I spoke to Twissell yesterday. You're right. But I didn't call him; he called me. So go; ask Twissell. Tell them what an important Technician you are. And if you want to shoot me first; shoot and to Time with you."
Harlan could not miss the actual exultation in the Computer's voice. At that moment he obviously felt enough the victor to believe that even a neuronic whipping would leave him on the profit side of the ledger.
Why? Was the breaking of Harlan so dear to his heart? Was his jealousy over Noys so all-consuming a passion?
Harlan did scarcely more than formulate the questions in his mind, and then the whole matter, Finge and all, seemed suddenly meaningless to him.
He pocketed his weapon, whirled out the door, and toward the nearest kettle shaft.
It was the Council, then, or Twissell, at the very least. He was afraid of none of them, nor of all put together.
With each passing day of the last unbelievable month he had grown more convinced of his own indispensability. The Council, even the Allwhen Council itself, would have no choice but to come to terms when it was a choice of bartering one girl for the existence of all of Eternity.






11. Full Circle


It was with a dull surprise that Technician Andrew Harlan, on bursting into the 575th, found himself in the night shift. The passing of the physiohours had gone unnoticed during his wild streaks along the kettle shafts. He stared hollowly at the dimmed corridors, the occasional evidence of the thinned-out night force at work.
But in the continued grip of his rage Harlan did not pause long to watch uselessly. He turned toward personal quarters. He would find Twissell's room on Computer Level as he had found Finge's and he had as little fear of being noticed or stopped.
The neuronic whip was still hard against his elbow as he stopped before Twissell's door (the name plate upon it advertising the fact in clear, inlaid lettering).
Harlan activated the door signal brashly on the buzzer level. He shorted the contact with a damp palm and let the sound become continuous. He could hear it dimly.
A step sounded lightly behind him and he ignored it in the sure knowledge that the man, whoever he was, would ignore him. (Oh, rose-red Technician's patch!)
But the sound of steps halted and a voice said, "Technician Harlan?"
Harlan whirled. It was a Junior Computer, relatively new to the Section. Harlan raged inwardly. This was not quite the 482nd. Here he was not merely a Technician, he was Twissell's Technician, and the younger Computers, in their anxiety to ingratiate themselves with the great Twissell, would extend a minimum civility to his Technician.
The Computer said, "Do you wish to see Senior Computer Twissell?"
Harlan fidgeted and said, "Yes, sir." (The fool! What did he think anyone would be standing signaling at a man's door for? To catch a kettle?)
"I'm afraid you can't," said the Computer.
"This is important enough to wake him," said Harlan.
"Maybe so," said the other, "but he's outwhen. He's not in the 575th."
"Exactly when is he, then?" asked Harlan impatiently.
The Computer's glance became a supercilious stare. "I wouldn't know."
Harlan said, "But I have an important appointment first thing in the morning."
"You have," said the Computer, and Harlan was at a loss to account for his obvious amusement at the thought.
The Computer went on, even smiling now, "You're a little early, aren't you?"
"But I must see him."
"I'm sure he'll be here in the morning." The smile broadened.
"But--"
The Computer passed by Harlan, carefully avoiding any contact, even of garments.
Harlan's fists clenched and unclenched. He stared helplessly after the Computer and then, simply because there was nothing else to do, he walked slowly, and without full consciousness of his surroundings, back to his own room.


Harlan slept fitfully. He told himself he needed sleep. He tried to relax by main force, and, of course, failed. His sleep period was a succession of futile thought.
First of all, there was Noys.
They would not dare harm her, he thought feverishly. They could not send her back to Time without first calculating the effect on Reality and that would take days, probably weeks. As an alternative, they might do to her what Finge had threatened for him; place her in the path of an untraceable accident.
He did not take that into serious consideration. There was no necessity for drastic action such as that. They would not risk Harlan's displeasure by doing it. (In the quiet of a darkened sleeping room, and in that phase of half sleep where things often grew queerly disproportionate in thought, Harlan found nothing grotesque in his sure opinion that the Allwhen Council would not dare risk a Technician's displeasure.)
Of course, there were uses to which a woman in captivity might be put. A beautiful wOman from a hedonistic Reality.
Resolutely Harlan put the thought away as often as it returned. It was at once more likely and more unthinkable than death, and he would have none of it.
He thought of Twis sell.
The old man was out of the 575th. Where was he during hours when he should have been asleep? An old man needs his sleep. Harlan was sure of the answer. There were Council consultations going on. About Harlan. About Noys. About what to do with an indispensable Technician one dared not touch.
Harlan's lips drew back. If Finge reported Harlan's assault of that evening, it would not affect their considerations in the least. His crimes could scarcely be worsened by it. His indispensability would certainly not be lessened.
And Harlan was by no means certain that Finge would report him. To admit having been forced to cringe before a Technician would put an Assistant Computer in a ridiculous light, and Finge might not choose to do so.
Harlan thought of Technicians as a group, which, of late, he had done rarely. His own somewhat anomalous position as Twissell's man and as half an Educator had kept him too far apart from other Technicians. But Technicians lacked solidarity anyway. Why should that be?
Did he have to go through the 575th and the 482nd rarely seeing or speaking to another Technician? Did they have to avoid even one another? Did they have to act as though they accepted the status into which the superstition of others forced them?
In his mind he had already forced the capitulation of the Council as far as Noys was concerned, and now he was making further demands. The Technicians were to be allowed an organization of their own, regular meetings-more friendship-better treatment from the others.
His final thought of himself was as a heroic social revolutionary, with Noys at his side, when he sank finally into a dreamless sleep..


The door signal awoke him. It whispered at him with hoarse impatience. He collected his thoughts to the point of being able to look at the small clock beside his bed and groaned inwardly.
Father Time! After all that he had overslept.
He managed to reach the proper button from bed and the viewsquare high on the door grew transparent. He did not recognize the face, but it carried authority whoever it was.
He opened the door and the man, wearing the orange patch of Administration, stepped in.
"Technician Andrew Harlan?"
"Yes, Administrator? You have business with me?"
The Administrator seemed in no wise discommoded at the sharp belligerence of the question. He said, "You have an appointment with Senior Computer Twissell?"
"Well?"
"I am here to inform you that you are late."
Harlan stared at him. "What's this all about? You're not from the 575th, are you?"
"The 222nd is my station," said the other frigidly. "Assistant Administrator Arbut Lemm. I'm in charge of the arrangements and I'm trying to avoid undue excitement by by-passing official notification over the Communiplate."
"What arrangements? What excitement? What's it all about? Listen, I've had conferences with Twissell before. He's my superior. There's no excitement involved."
A look of surprise passed momentarily over the studious lack of expression the Administrator had so far kept on his face. "You haven't been informed?"
"About what?"
"Why, that a subcommittee of the Allwhen Council is holding session here at the 575th. This place, I am told, has been alive with the news for hours."
"And they want to see me?" As soon as he asked that, Harlan thought: Of course they want to see me. What else could the session be about but me?
And he understood the amusement of the Junior Computer last night outside Twissell's room. The Computer knew of the projected committee meeting and it amused him to think that a Technician could possibly expect to see Twissell at a time like that. Very amusing, thought Harlan bitterly.
The Administrator said, "I have my orders. I know nothing more." Then, still surprised, "You've heard nothing of this?"
"Technicians," said Harlan sarcastically, "lead sheltered lives."


Five besides Twissell! Senior Computers all, none less than thirtyfive years an Eternal.
Six weeks earlier Harlan would have been overwhelmed by the honor of sitting at lunch with such a group, tongue-tied by the combination of responsibility and power they represented. They would have seemed twice life-size to him.
But now they were antagonists of his, worse still, judges. He had no time to be impressed. He had to plan his strategy.
They might not know that he was aware they had Noys. They could not know unless Finge told them of his last meeting with Harlan. In the clear light of day, however, he was more than ever convinced that Finge was not the man to broadcast publicly the fact that he had been browbeaten and insulted by a Technician.
It seemed advisable, then, for Harlan to nurse this possible advantage for the time being, to let them make the first move, say the first sentence that would join actual combat.
They seemed in no hurry. They stared at him placidly over an abstemious lunch as though he were an interesting specimen spreadeagled against a plane of force by mild repulsors. In desperation Harlan stared back.
He knew all of them by reputation and by trimensional reproduction in the physiomonthly orientation films. The films co-ordinated developments throughout the various Sections of Eternity and were required viewing for all Eternals with rating from Observer up.
August Sennor, the bald one (not even eyebrows or eyelashes), of course attracted Harlan most. First, because the odd appearance of those dark, staring eyes against bare eyelids and forehead was remarkably greater in person than it had ever seemed in trimension. Second, because of his knowledge of past collisions of view between Sennor and Twissell. Finally, because Sennor did not confine himself to watching Harlan. He shot questions at him in a sharp voice.
For the most part his questions were unanswerable, such as: "How did you first come to be interested in Primitive times, young man?" "Do you find the study rewarding, young man?"
Finally, he seemed to settle himself in his seat. He pushed his plate casually onto the disposal chute and clasped his thick fingers lightly before him. (There was no hair on the back of the hands, Harlan noticed.)
Sennor said, "There is something I have always wanted to know. Perhaps you can help me."
Harlan thought: All right, now, this is it.
Aloud he said, "If I can, sir."
"Some of us here in Eternity-I won't say all, or even enough" (and he cast a quick glance at Twissell's tired face, while the others drew closer to listen) "but some, at any rate-are interested in the philosophy of Time. Perhaps you know what I mean."
"The paradoxes of Time-travel, sir?"
"Well, if you want to put it melodramatically, yes. But that's not all, of course. There is the question of the true nature of Reality, the question of the conservation of mass-energy during Reality Change and so on. Now we in Eternity are influenced in our consideration of such things by knowing the facts of Time-travel. Your creatures of the Primitive era, however, knew nothing of Time-travel. What were their views on the matter?"
Twissell's whisper carried the length of the table. "Cobwebs!"
But Sennor ignored that. He said, "Would you answer my question, Technician?"
Harlan said, "The Primitives gave virtually no thought to Timetravel, Computer."
"Did not consider it possible, eh?"
"I believethat's right."
"Did not even speculate?"
"Well, as to that," said Harlan uncertainly, "I believe there were speculations of sorts in some types of escape literature. I am not well acquainted with these, but I believe a recurrent theme was that of the man who returned in Time to kill his own grandfather as a child."
Sennor seemed delighted. "Wonderful! Wonderful! After all, that is at least an expression of the basic paradox of Time-travel, if we assume an indeviant Reality, eh? Now your Primitives, I'll venture to state, never assumed anything but an indeviant Reality. Am I right?"
Harlan waited to answer. He did not see where the conversation was aiming or what Sennor's deeper purposes were, and it unnerved him. He said, "I don't know enough to answer you with certainty, sir. I believe there may have been speculations as to alternate paths of time or planes of existence. I don't know."
Sennor thrust out a lower lip. "I'm sure you're wrong. You may have been misled by reading your own knowledge into various ambiguities you may have come across. No, without actual experience of Time-travel, the philosophic intricacies of Reality would be quite beyond the human mind. For instance, why does Reality possess inertia? We all know that it does. Any alteration in its flow must reach a certain magnitude before a Change, a true Change, is effected. Even then, Reality has a tendency to flow back to its original position.
"For instance, suppose a Change here in the 575th. Reality will change with increasing effects to perhaps the 600th. It will change, but with continually lesser effects to perhaps the 650th. Thereafter, Reality will be unchanged. We all know this is so, but do any of us know why it is so? Intuitive reasoning would suggest that any Reality Change would increase its effects without limit as the Centuries pass, yet that is not so.
"Take another point. Technician Harlan, I'm told, is excellent at selecting the exact Minimum Change Required for any situation. I'll wager he cannot explain how he arrives at his own choice.
"Consider how helpless the Primitives must be. They worry about a man killing his own grandfather because they do not understand the truth about Reality. Take a more likely and a more easily analyzed case and let's consider the man who in his travels through time meets himself--"
Harlan said sharply, "What about a man who meets himself?"
The fact that Harlan interrupted a Computer was a breach of manners in itself. His tone of voice worsened the breach to a scandalous extent, and all eyes turned reproachfully on the Technician.
Sennor harumphed, but spoke in the strained tone of one determined to be polite despite nearly insuperable difficulties. He said, continuing his broken sentence and thus avoiding the appearance of answering directly the unmannerly question addressed to him, "And the four subdivisions into which such an act can fall. Call the man earlier in physiotime, A, and the one later, B. Subdivision one, A and B may not see one another, or do anything that will significantly affect one another. In that case, they have not really met and we may dismiss this case as trivial.
"Or B, the later individual, may see A while A does not see B. Here, too, no serious consequences need be expected. B, seeing A, sees him in a position and engaged in activity of which he already has knowledge. Nothing new is involved.
"The third and fourth possibilities are that A sees B, while B does not see A, and that A and B see one another. In each possibility, the serious point is that A has seen B; the man at an earlier stage in his physiological existence sees himself at a later stage. Observe that he has learned he will be alive at the apparent age of B. He knows he will live long enough to perform the action he has witnessed. Now a man in knowing his own future in even the slightest detail can act on that knowledge and therefore changes his future. It follows that Reality must be changed to the extent of not allowing A and B to meet or, at the very least, of preventing A from seeing B. Then, since nothing in a Reality made un-Real can be detected, A never has met B. Similarly, in every apparent paradox of Time-travel, Reality always changes to avoid the paradox and we come to the conclusion that there are no paradoxes in Time-travel and that there can be none."
Sennor looked well pleased with himself and his exposition, but Twis sell rose to his feet.
Twis sell said, "I believe, gentlemen, that time presses."
Far more suddenly than Harlan would have thought the lunch was over. Five of the subcommittee members filed out, nodding at him, with the air of those whose curiosity, mild at best, had been assuaged. Only Sennor held out a hand and added a gruff "Good day, young man" to the nod.
With mixed feelings Harlan watched them go. What had been the purpose of the luncheon? Most of all, why the reference to men meeting themselves? They had made no mention of Noys. Were they there, then, only to study him? Survey him from top to bottom and leave him to Twissell's judging?
Twissell returned to the table, empty now of food and cutlery. He was alone with Harlan now, and almost as though to symbolize that he wielded a new cigarette between his fingers.
He said, "And now to work, Harlan. We have a great deal to do."
But Harlan would not, could not, wait longer. He said flatly, "Before we do anything, I have something to say."
Twissell looked surprised. The skin of his face puckered up about his faded eyes, and he tamped at the ash end of his cigarette thoughtfully.
He said, "By all means, speak if you wish, but first, sit down, sit down, boy."
Technician Andrew Harlan did not sit down. He strode up and back the length of the table, biting off his sentences hard to keep them from boiling and bubbling into incoherence. Senior Computer Laban Twissell's age-yellowed pippin of a head turned back and forth as he followed the other's nervous stride.
Harlan said, "For weeks now I've been going through films on the history of mathematics. Books from several Realities of the 575th. The Realities don't matter much. Mathematics doesn't change. The order of its development doesn't change either. No matter how else the Realities shifted, mathematical history stayed about the same. The mathematicians changed; different ones switched discoveries, but the end results-- Anyway, I pounded a lot of it into my head. How does that strike you?"
Twissell frowned and said, "A queer occupation for a Technician?"
"But I'm not just a Technician," said Harlan. "You know that."
"Go on," said Twissell and he looked at the timepiece he wore. The fingers that held his cigarette played with it with unwonted nervousness.
Harlan said, "There was a man named Vikkor Mallansohn who lived in the 24th Century. That was part of the Primitive era, you know. The thing he is known best for is the fact that he first successfully built a Temporal Field. That means, of course, that he invented Eternity, since Eternity is only one tremendous Temporal Field shortcircuiting ordinary Time and free of the limitations of ordinary Time."
"You were taught this as a Cub, boy."
"But I was not taught that Vikkor Mallansohn could not possibly have invented the Temporal Field in the 24th Century. Nor could anyone have. The mathematical basis for it didn't exist. The fundamental Lefebvre equations did not exist; nor could they exist until the researches of Jan Verdeer in the 27th Century."
If there was one sign by which Senior Computer Twissell could indicate complete astonishment, it was that of dropping his cigarette. He dropped it now. Even his smile was gone.
He said, "Were you taught the Lefebvre equations, boy?"
"No. And I don't say I understand them. But they're necessary for the Temporal Field. I've learned that. And they weren't discovered till the 27th. I know that, too."
Twissell bent to pick up his cigarette and regarded it dubiously. "What if Mallansohn had stumbled on the Temporal Field without being aware of the mathematical justification? What if it were simply an empirical discovery? There have been many such."
"I've thought of that. But after the Field was invented, it took three centuries to work out its implications and at the end of that time there was no one way in which Mallansohn's Field could be improved on. That could not be coincidence. In a hundred ways, Mallansohn's design showed that he must have used the Lefebvre equations. If he knew them or bad developed them without Verdeer's work, which is impossible, why didn't he say so?"
Twissell said, "You insist on talking like a mathematician. Who told you all this?"
"I've been viewing films."
"No more?"
"And thinking."
"Without advanced mathematical training? I've watched you closely for years, boy, and would not have guessed that particular talent of yours. Go on."
"Eternity could never have been established without Mallansohn's discovery of the Temporal Field. Mallansohn could never have accomplished this without a knowledge of mathematics that existed only in his future. That's number one. Meanwhile, here in Eternity at this moment, there is a Cub who was selected as an Eternal against all the rules, since he was overage and married, to boot. You are educating him in mathematics and in Primitive sociology. That's number two."
"Well?"
"I say that it is your intention to send him back into Time somehow, back past the downwhen terminus of Eternity, back to the 24th. It is your intention to have the Cub, Cooper, teach the Lefebvre equations to Mallansohn. You see, then," Harlan added with tense passion, "that my own position as expert in the Primitive and my knowledge of that position entitles me to special treatment. Very special treatment."
"Father Time!" muttered Twissell.
"It's true, isn't it? We come full circle, _with my help_. Without itÖ" He let the sentence hang.
"You come so close to the truth," said Twissell. "Yet I could swear there was nothing to indicate--" He fell into a study in which neither Harlan nor the outside world seemed to play a part.
Harlan said quickly, "Only close to the truth? It is the truth." He could not tell why he was so certain of the essentials of what he said, even quite apart from the fact that he so desperately wanted it to be so.
Twissell said, "No, no, not the exact truth. The Cub, Cooper, is not going back to the 24th to teach Mallansohn anything."
"I don't believe you."
"But you must. You must see the importance of this. I want your co-operation through what is left of the project. You see, Harlan, the situation is more full circle than you imagine. Much more so, boy. Cub Brinsley Sheridan Cooper is Vikkor Mallansohn!"






12. The Beginning of Eternity


Harlan would not have thought that Twissell could have said anything at that moment that could have surprised him. He was wrong.
He said, "Mallansohn. He-"
Twissell, having smoked his cigarette to a stub, produced another and said, "Yes, Mallansohn. Do you want a quick summary of Mallansohn's life? Here it is. He was born in the 78th, spent some time in Eternity, and died in the 24th."
Twissell's small hand placed itself lightly on Harlan's elbow and his gnomish face broke into a wrinkled extension of his usual smile. "But come, boy, physiotime passes even for us and we are not completely masters of ourselves this day. Won't you come with me to my office?"
He led the way and Harlan followed, not entirely aware of the opening doors and the moving ramps.
He was relating the new information to his own problem and plan of action. With the passing of the first moment of disorientation his resolution returned. After all, how did this change things except to make his own importance to Eternity still more crucial, his value higher, his demands more sure to be met, Noys more certain to be bartered back to him.
Noys!
Father Time, they must not harm her! She seemed the only real part of his life. All Eternity beside was only a filmy fantasy, and not a worth-while one, either.


When he found himself in Computer Twissell's office, he could not clearly recall how it had come about that he had passed from the dining area here. Though he looked about and tried to make the office grow real by sheer force of the mass of its contents, it still seemed but another part of a dream that had outlived its usefulness.
Twissell's office was a clean, long room of porcelain asepsis. One wall of the office was crowded from floor to ceiling and wall to distant wall with the computing micro-units which, together, made up the largest privately operated Computaplex in Eternity and, indeed, one of the largest altogether. The opposite wall was crammed with reference films. Between the two what was left of the room was scarcely more than a corridor, broken by a desk, two chairs, recording and projecting equipment, and an unusual object the like of which Harlan was not familiar with and which did not reveal its use until Twissell flicked the remnants of a cigarette into it.
It flashed noiselessly and Twissell, in his usual prestidigitational fashion, held another in his hands.
Harlan thought: To the point, now.
He began, a trifle too loudly, a bit too truculently, "There is a girl in the 482nd--"
Twissell frowned, waved one hand quickly as though brushing an unpleasant matter hastily to one side. "I know, I know. She will not be disturbed, nor you. All will be well. I will see to it."
"Do you mean--"
"I tell you I know the story. If the matter has troubled you, it need trouble you no more."
Harlan stared at the old man, stupefied. Was this all? Though he had thought intently of the immensity of his power, he had not expected so clear a demonstration.
But Twissell was talking again.
"Let me tell you a story," he began, with almost the tone he would have used in addressing a newly inducted Cub. "I had not thought this would be necessary, and perhaps it still isn't, but your own researches and insight deserve it."
He stared at Harlan quizzically and said, "You know, I still can't quite believe that you worked this out on your own," then went on:
"The man most of Eternity knows as Vikkor Mallansohn left the record of his life behind him after he died. It was not quite a diary, not quite a biography. It was more of a guide, bequeathed to the Eternals he knew would someday exist. It was enclosed in a volume of Time-stasis which could be opened only by the Computers of Eternity, and which therefore remained untouched for three Centuries after his death, until Eternity was established and Senior Computer Henry Wadsman, the first of the great Eternals, opened it. The document has been passed along in strictest security since, along a line of Senior Computers ending with myself. It is referred to as the Mallansohn memoir.
"The memoir tells the story of a man named Brinsley Sheridan Cooper, born in the 78th, inducted as a Cub into Eternity at the age of twenty-three, having been married for a little over a year, but having been, as yet, childless.
"Having entered Eternity, Cooper was trained in mathematics by a Computer named Laban Twissell and in Primitive sociology by a Technician named Andrew Harlan. After a thorough grounding in both disciplines, and in such matters as temporal engineering as well, he was sent back to the 24th to teach certain necessary techniques to a Primitive scientist named Vikkor Mallansohn.
"Once having reached the 24th, he embarked first on a slow process of adjusting himself to the society. In this he benefited a great deal from the training of Technician Harlan and the detailed advice of Computer Twissell, who seemed to have an uncanny insight into some of the problems he was to face.
"After the passage of two years, Cooper located one Vikkor Mallansohn, an eccentric recluse in the California backwoods, relationless and friendless but gifted with a daring and unconventional mind. Cooper made friends slowly, acclimated the man to the thought of having met a traveler from the future still more slowly, and set about teaching the man the mathematics he must know.
"With the passage of time, Cooper adopted the other's habits, learned to shift for himself with the help of a clumsy Diesel-oil electric generator and with wired electrical appliances which freed them of dependence on power beams.
"But progress was slow and Cooper found himself something less than a marvelous teacher. Mallansohn grew morose and unco-operative and then one day died, quite suddenly, in a fall down a canyon of the wild, mountainous country in which they lived. Cooper, after weeks of despair, with the ruin of his lifework and, presumably, of all Eternity, staring him in the eye, decided on a desperate expedient. He did not report Mallansohn's death. Instead, he slowly took to building, out of the materials at hand, a Temporal Field.
"The details do not matter. He succeeded after mountains of drudgery and improvisation and took the generator to the California Institute of Technology, just as years before he had expected the real Mallansohn to do.
"You know the story from your own studies. You know of the disbelief and rebuffs he first met, his period under observation, his escape and the near-loss of his generator, the help he received from the man at the lunch counter whose name he never learned, but who is now one of Eternity's heroes, and of the final demonstration for Professor Zimbalist, in which a white mouse moved backward and forward in time. I won't bore you with any of that.
"Cooper used the name of Vikkor Mallansohn in all this because it gave him a background and made him an authentic product of the 24th. The body of the real Mallansohn was never recovered.
"In the remainder of his life, he cherished his generator and cooperated with the Institute scientists in duplicating it. He dared do no more than that. He could not teach them the Lefebvre equations without outlining three Centuries of mathematical development that was to come. He could not, dared not hint at his true origin. He dared not do more than the real Vikkor Mallansohn had, to his knowledge, done.
"The men who worked with him were frustrated to find a man who could perform so brilliantly and yet was unable to explain the whys of his performance. And he himself was frustrated too, because he foresaw, without in any way being able to quicken, the work that would lead, step by step, to the classic experiments of Jan Verdeer, and how from that the great Antoine Lefebvre would construct the basic equations of Reality. And how, after that, Eternity would be constructed.
"It was only toward the end of his long life that Cooper, staring into a Pacific sunset (he describes the scene in some detail in his memoir) came to the great realization that he was Vikkor Mallansohn; he was not a substitute but the man himself. The name might not be his, but the man history called Mallansohn was really Brinsley Sheridan Cooper.
"Fired with that thought, and with all that implied, anxious that the process of establishing Eternity be somehow quickened, improved, and made more secure, he wrote his memoir and placed it in a cube of Time-stasis in the living room of his house.
"And so the circle was closed. Cooper-Mallansohn's intentions in writing the memoir were, of course, disregarded. Cooper must go through his life exactly as he had gone through it. Primitive Reality allows of no changes. At this moment in physiotime, the Cooper you know is unaware of what lies ahead of him. He believes he is only to instruct Mallansohn and to return. He will continue to believe so until the years teach him differently and he sits down to write his memoir.
"The intention of the circle in Time is to establish the knowledge of Time-travel and of the nature of Reality, to build Eternity, ahead of its natural Time. Left to itself, mankind would not have learned the truth about Time before their technological advances in other directions had made racial suicide inevitable."
Harlan listened intently, caught up in the vision of a mighty circle in Time, closed upon itself, and traversing Eternity in part of its course. He came as close to forgetting Noys, for the moment, as he ever could.
He asked, "Then you knew all along everything you were to do, everything I was to do, everything I have done."
Twissell, who seemed lost in his own telling of the tale, his eyes peering through a haze of bluish tobacco smoke, came slowly to life. His old, wise eyes fixed themselves on Harlan and he said reproachfully, "No, of course not. There was a lapse of decades of physiotime between Cooper's stay in Eternity and the moment when he wrote his memoir. He could remember only so much, and only what he himself had witnessed. You should realize that."
Twissell sighed and he drew a gnarled finger through a line of updrafting smoke, breaking it into little turbulent swirls. "It worked itself out. First, I was found and brought to Eternity. When, in the fullness of physiotime, I became a Senior Computer, I was given the memoir and placed in charge. I had been described as in charge, so I was placed in charge. Again in the fullness of physiotime, you appeared in the changing of a Reality (we had watched your earlier analogues carefully), and then Cooper.
"I filled in the details by using my common sense and the services of the Computaplex. How carefully, for instance, we instructed Educator Yarrow in his part while betraying none of the significant truth. How carefully, in his turn, he stimulated your interest in the Primitive.
"How carefully we had had to keep Cooper from learning anything he did not prove he had learned by reference in the memoir." Twissell smiled sadly. "Sennor amuses himself with matters such as this. He calls it the reversal of cause and effect. Knowing the effect, one adjusts the cause. Fortunately, I am not the cobweb spinner Sennor is.
"I was pleased, boy, to find you so excellent an Observer and Technician. The memoir had not mentioned that since Cooper had no opportunity to observe your work or evaluate it. This suited me. I could use you in a more ordinary task that would make your essential one less noticeable. Even your recent stay with Computer Finge fitted in. Cooper mentioned a period of your absence during which his mathematical studies were so sharpened that he longed for your return. Once, though, you frightened me."
Harlan said, at once, "You mean the time I took Cooper along the kettle ways."
"How do you come to guess that?" demanded Twissell.
"It was the one time you were really angry with me. I suppose now it went against something in the Mallansohn memoir."
"Not quite. It was just that the memoir did not speak of the kettles. It seemed to me that to avoid mention of such an outstanding aspect of Eternity meant he had little experience with it. It was my intention therefore to keep him away from the kettles as much as possible. The fact that you had taken him upwhen in one disturbed me greatly, but nothing happened afterward. Things continued as they should, so all is well."
The old Computer rubbed one hand slowly over the other, staring at the young Technician with a look compounded of surprise and curiosity. "And all along you've been guessing this. It simply astonishes me. I would have sworn that even a fully trained Computer could not have made the proper deductions, given only the information you had. For a Technician to do it is uncanny." He leaned forward, tapped Harlan's knee lightly. "The Mallansohn memoir says nothing about your life after Cooper's leaving, of course."
"I understand, sir," said Harlan.
"We will be free then, in a manner of speaking, to do as we please with it. You show a surprising talent that must not be wasted. I think you are meant for something more than a Technician. I promise nothing now, but I presume that you realize that Computership is a clistinct possibility."
It was easy for Harlan to keep his dark face expressionless. He had had years of practice for that.
He thought: An additional bribe.
But nothing must be left to conjecture. His guesses, wild and unsupported at the start, arrived at by a freak of insight in the course of a very unusual and stimulating night, had become reasonable as the result of directed library research. They had become certainties now that Twissell had told him the story. Yet in one way at least there had been a deviation. Cooper was Mallansohn.
That had simply improved his position, but, wrong in one respect, he might be wrong in another. He must leave nothing to chance, then. Have it out! Make certain!
He said levelly, almost casually, "The responsibility is great for me, also, now that I know the truth."
"Yes, indeed?"
"How fragile is the situation? Suppose something unexpected were to happen and I were to miss a day when I ought to have been teaching Cooper something vital."
"I don't understand you."
(Was it Harlan's imagination, or had a spark of alarm sprung to life in those old, tired eyes?)
"I mean, can the circle break? Let me put it this way. If an unexpected blow on the head puts me out of action at a time when the memoir distinctly states I am well and active, is the whole scheme disrupted? Or suppose, for some reason, I deliberately choose not to follow the memoir. What then?"
"But what puts all this in your mind?"
"It seems a logical thought. It seems to me that by a careless or willful action, I could break the circle, and well, what? Destroy Eternity? It seems so. If it is so," Harlan added composedly, "I ought to be told so that I may be careful to do nothing unfitting. Though I imagine it would take a rather unusual circumstance to drive me to such a thing."
Twissell laughed, but the laughter rang false and empty in Harlan's ear. "This is all purely academic, my boy. Nothing of this will happen since it hasn't happened. The full circle will not break."
"It might," said Harlan. "The girl of the 482nd--"
"Is safe," said Twissell. He rose impatiently. "There's no end to this kind of talk and I have quite enough of logic-chopping from the rest of the subcommittee in charge of the project. Meanwhile, I have yet to tell you what I originally called you here to hear and physiotime is still passing. Will you come with me?
Harlan was satisfied. The situation was clear and his power unmistakable. Twissell knew that Harlan could say, at will: "I will no longer have anything to do with Cooper." Twissell knew Harlan could at any moment destroy Eternity by giving Cooper significant information concerning the memoir.
Harlan had known enough to do this yesterday. Twissell had thought to overwhelm him with the knowledge of the importance of his task, but if the Computer had thought to force Harlan into line in that way, he was mistaken.
Harlan had made his threat very clear with respect to Noys's safety, and Twissell's expression as he had barked, "Is safe," showed he realized the nature of the threat.
Harlan rose and followed Twissell.


Harlan had never been in the room they now entered. It was large and looked as though walls had been knocked down for its sake. It had been entered through a narrow corridor which had been blocked off by a force-screen that did not go down until after a pause sufficient for Twissell's face to be scanned thoroughly by automatic machinery.
The largest part of the room was filled by a sphere that reached nearly to the ceiling. A door was open, showing four small steps leading to a well-lit platform within.
Voices sounded from inside and even as Harlan watched, legs appeared in the opening and descended the steps. A man emerged and another pair of legs appeared behind him. It was Sennor of the Allwhen Council and behind him was another of the group at the breakfast table.
Twissell did not look pleased at this. His voice, however, was restrained. "Is the subcommittee still here?"
"Only we two," said Sennor casually, "Rice and myself. A beautiful instrument we have here. It has the level of complexity of a spaceship."
Rice was a paunchy man with the perplexed look of one who is accustomed to being right yet finds himself unaccountably on the losing side of an argument. He rubbed his bulbous nose and said, "Sennor's mind is running on space-travel lately."
Sennor's bald head glistened in the light. "It's a neat point, Twissell," he said. "I put it to you. Is space-travel a positive factor or a negative factor in the calculus of Reality?"
"The question is meaningless," said Twissell impatiently. "What type of space-travel in what society under what circumstances?"
"Oh, come. Surely there's something to be said concerning spacetravel in the abstract."
"Only that it is self-limiting, that it exhausts itself and dies out."
"Then it is useless," said Sennor with satisfaction, "and therefore it is a negative factor. My view entirely."
"If you please," said Twissell, "Cooper will be here soon. We will need the floor clear."
"By all means." Sennor hooked an arm under that of Rice and led him away. His voice declaimed clearly as they departed. "Periodically, my dear Rice, all the mental effort of mankind is concentrated on space-travel, which is doomed to a frustrated end by the nature of things. I would set up the matrices except that I am certain this is obvious to you. With minds concentrated on space, there is neglect of the proper development of things earthly. I am preparing a thesis now for submission to the Council recommending that Realities be changed to eliminate all space-travel eras as a matter of course."
Rice's treble sounded. "But you can't be that drastic. Space-travel is a valuable safety-valve in some civilizations. Take Reality 54 of the 290th, which I happen to recall offhand. Now there--"
The voices cut off and Twissell said, "A strange man, Sennor. Intellectually, he's worth two of any of the rest of us, but his worth is lost in leapfrog enthusiasms."
Harlan said, "Do you suppose he can be right? About space-travel, I mean."
"I doubt it. We'd have a better chance of judging if Sennor would actually submit the thesis he mentioned. But he won't. He'll have a new enthusiasm before he's finished and drop the old. But never mind--" He brought the flat of his hand against the sphere so that it rang resoundingly, then brought his hand back so that he could remove a cigarette from his lip. He said, "Can you guess what this is, Technician?"
"Harlan said, "It looks like an outsize kettle with a top."
"Exactly. You're right. You've got it. Come on inside."
Harlan followed Twissell into the sphere. It was large enough to hold four or five men, but the interior was absolutely featureless. The floor was smooth, the curved wall was broken by two windows. That was all.
"No controls?" asked Harlan.
"Remote controls," said Twissell. He ran his hand over the smoothness of the wall and said, "Double walls. The entire interwall volume is given over to a self-contained Temporal Field. This instrument is a kettle that is not restricted to the kettle shafts but can pass beyond the downwhen terminus of Eternity. Its design and construction were made possible by valuable hints in the Mallansohn memoir. Come with me."
The control room was a cut-off corner of the large room. Harlan stepped in and stared somberly at immense bus bars.
Twissell said, "Can you hear me, boy?"
Harlan started and looked about. He had not been aware that Twissell had not followed him inside. He stepped automatically to the window and Twissell waved to him. Harlan said, "I can hear you, sir. Do you want me outside?"
"Not at all. You are locked in."
Harlan sprang to the door and his stomach turned into a series of cold, wet knots. Twissell was correct and what in Time was going on?
Twissell said, "You will be relieved to know, boy, that your responsibility is over. You were worried about that responsibility; you asked searching questions about it; and I think I know what you meant. This should not be your responsibility. It is mine alone. Unfortunately, we must have you in the control room, since it is stated that you were there and handled the controls. It is stated in the Mallansohn memoir. Cooper will see you through the window and that will take care of that.
"Furthermore, I will ask you to make the final contact according to instructions I will give you. If you feel that that, too, is too great a responsibility, you may relax. Another contact in parallel with yours is in charge of another man. If, for any reason, you are unable to operate the contact, he will do so. Furthermore, I will cut off radio transmission from within the control room. You will be able to hear us but not to speak to us. You need not fear, therefore, that some involuntary exclamation from you will break the circle."
Harlan stared helplessly out the window.
Twissell went on, "Cooper will be here in moments and his trip to the Primitive will take place within two physiohours. After that, boy, the project will be over and you and I will be free."
Harlan was plunging chokingly through the vortex of a waking nightmare. Had Twissell tricked him? Had everything he had done been designed only to get Harlan quietly into a locked control room? Having learned that Harlan knew his own importance, had he improvised with diabolical cleverness, keeping him engaged in conversation, drugging his emotions with words, leading him here, leading him there, until the time was ripe for locking him in?
That quick and easy surrender over Noys. She won't be hurt, Twissell had said. All will be well.
How could he have believed that! If they were not going to harm her, or touch her, why the temporal barrier across the kettleways at the 100,000th? That alone should have given Twissell completely away.
But because he (fool!) wanted to believe, he allowed himself to be led through those last physiohours blindly, placed inside a locked room where he was no longer needed, even to close the final contact.
In one stroke he had been robbed of his essentiality. The trumps in his hand had been neatly maneuvered into deuces and Noys was out of his reach forever. What punishment might lie in wait for him did not concern him. Noys was out of his reach forever.
It had never occurred to him that the project would be so close to its end. That, of course, was what had really made his defeat possible.
Twissell's voice sounded dimly. "You'll be cut off now, boy."
Harlan was alone, helpless, uselessÖ






13. Beyond the Downwhen Terminus


Brinsley Cooper entered. Excitement flushed his thin face and made it almost youthful, despite the heavy Mallansohn mustache that draped its upper lip.
(Harlan could see him through the window, hear him clearly over the room's radio. He thought bitterly: A Mallansohn mustache! Of course!)
Cooper strode toward Twissell. "They wouldn't let me in till now, Computer."
"Very right," said Twissell. "They had their instructions."
"Now's the time, though? I'll beheading out?"
"Almost the time."
"And I'll be coming back? I'll be seeing Eternity again?" Despite the straightness Cooper gave his back, there was an edge of uncertainty in his voice.
(Within the control room Harlan brought his clenched hands bitterly to the reinforced glass of the window, longing to break through somehow, to shout: "Stop it! Meet my terms, or I'll-" What was the use?)
Cooper looked about the room, apparently unaware that Twissell had refrained from answering his question. His glance fell on Harlan at the control-room window.
He waved his hand excitedly. "Technician Harlan! Come on out. I want to shake your hand before I go."
Twissell interposed. "Not now, boy, not now. He's at the controls."
Cooper said, "Oh? You know, he doesn't look well."
Twissell said, "I've been telling him the true nature of the project. I'm afraid that's enough to make anyone nervous."
Cooper said, "Great Time, yes! I've known about it for weeks now and I'm not used to it yet." There was a trace of near-hysteria in his laugh. "I still haven't got it through my thick head that it is really my show. I-I'm a little scared."
"I scarcely blame you for that."
"It's my stomach, mostly, you know. It's the least happy part of me."
Twissell said, "Well, it's very natural and it will pass. Meanwhile, your time of departure on Standard Intertemporal has been set and there is still a certain amount of orientation to be gone through. For instance, you haven't actually seen the kettle you will use."


In the two hours that passed Harlan heard it all, whether they were in sight or not. Twissell lectured Cooper in an oddly stilted manner, and Harlan knew the reason. Cooper was being informed of just those things that he was to mention in Mallansohn's memoir.
(Full circle. Full circle. And no way for Harlan to break that circle in one, last defiant Samson-smash of the temple. Round and round the circle goes; round and round it goes.)
"Ordinary kettles," he heard Twissell say, "are both pushed and pulled, if we can use such terms in the case of Intertemporal forces. In traveling from Century X to Century Y within Eternity there is a fully powered initial point and a fully powered final point.
"What we have here is a kettle with a powered initial point but an unpowered destination point. It can only be pushed, not pulled. For that reason, it must utilize energies at a level whole orders of magnitude higher than those used by ordinary kettles. Special power-transfer units have had to be laid down along the kettleways to siphon in sufficient concentrations of energy from Nova Sol.
"This special kettle, its controls and power supply, are a composite structure. For physiodecades, the passing Realities have been combed for special alloys and special techniques. The 13th Reality of the 222nd was the key. It developed the Temporal Pressor and without that, this kettle could not have been built. The 13th Reality of the 222nd."
He pronounced that with elaborate distinctness.
(Harlan thought: Remember that, Cooper! Remember the 13th Reality of the 222nd so you can put it into the Mallansohn memoir so that the Etemals will know where to look so they will know what to tell you so you can put itÖ Round and round the circle goesÖ)
Twissell said, "The kettle has not been tested past the downwhen terminus, of course, but it has taken numerous trips within Eternity. We are convinced there will be no bad effects."
"There can't be, can there?" said Cooper. "I mean I did get there or Mallansohn could not have succeeded in building the field and he did succeed."
Twissell said, "Exactly. You will find yourself in a protected and isolated spot in the sparsely populated southwestern area of the United States of AmellikaÖ"
"America," corrected Cooper.
"America, then. The Century will be the 24th; or, to put it to nearest hundredth, the 23.17th. I suppose we can even call it the year 2317, if we wish. The kettle, as you saw, is large, much larger than necessary for you. It is being filled now with food, water, and the means of shelter and defense. You will have detailed instructions that will, of course, be meaningless to anyone but you. I must impress upon you now that your first task will be to make certain that none of the indigenous inhabitants discovers you before you are ready for them. You will have force-diggers with which you will be able to burrow well into a mountain to form a cache. You will have to remove the contents of the kettle rapidly. They will be stacked so as to facilitate that."
(Harlan thought: Repeat! Repeat! He must have been told all this before, but repeat what must go into the memoir. Round and roundÖ)
Twissell said, "You will have to unload in fifteen minutes. After that, the kettle will return automatically to starting point, carrying with it all tools that are too advanced for the Century. You will have a list of those. After the kettle returns, you will be on your own."
Cooper said, "Must the kettle return so quickly?"
Twissell said, "A quick return increases the probabilities of success."
(Harlan thought: The kettle must return in fifteen minutes because it did return in fifteen minutes. Round andÖ)
Twissell hurried on. "We cannot attempt to counterfeit their medium of exchange of any of their negotiable scrip. You will have gold in the form of small nuggets. You will be able to explain its possession according to your detailed instructions. You will have native clothing to wear or at least clothing that will pass for native."
"Right," said Cooper.
"Now, remember. Move slowly. Take weeks, if necessary. Work your way into the era, spiritually. Technician Harlan's instructions are a good basis but they are not enough. You will have a wireless receiver built on the principles of the z4th which will enable you to come abreast of the current events and, more important, learn the proper pronunciation and intonation of the language of the times. Do that thoroughly. I'm sure that Harlan's knowledge of English is excellent, but nothing can substitute for native pronunciation on the spot."
Cooper said, "What if I don't end up in the right spot? I mean, not in the 23.17?"
"Check on that very carefully, of course. But it will be right. It will be right."
(Harlan thought: It will be right because it was right. RoundÖ)
Cooper must have looked unconvinced, though, for Twissell said, "The accuracy of focus was carefully worked out. I intended to explain our methods and now is a good time. For one thing, it will help Harlan understand the controls."
(Suddenly Harlan turned away from the windows and fixed his gaze on the controls. A corner of the curtain of despair lifted. What if--)


Twissell still lectured Cooper with the anxious overprecise tone of the schoolteacher, and with part of his mind Harlan still listened.
Twissell said, "Obviously a serious problem was that of determining how far into the Primitive an object is sent after the application of a given energy thrust. The most direct method would have been to send a man into the downwhen via this kettle using carefully graduated thrust levels. To do that, however, would have meant a certain lapse of time in each case while the man determined the Century to its nearest hundredth through astronomical observation or by obtaining appropriate information over the wireless. That would be slow and also dangerous since the man might well be discovered by the native inhabitants with probably catastrophic effects on our project.
"What we did then instead was this: We sent back a known mass of the radioactive isotope, niobium-94, which decays by beta-particle emission to the stable isotope, molybdenum-94. The process has a halflife of almost exactly 500 Centuries. The original radiation intensity of the mass was known. That intensity decreases with time according to the simple relationship involved in first-order kinetics, and, of course, the intensity can be measured with great precision.
"When the kettle reaches its destination in Primitive times, the ampule containing the isotope is discharged into the mountainside and the kettle then returns to Eternity. At the moment in physiotime that the ampule is discharged, it simultaneously appears at all future Times growing progressively older. At the place of discharge in the 575th (in actual Time and not in Eternity) a Technician detects the ampule by its radiation and retrieves it.
"The radiation intensity is measured, the time it has remained in the mountainside is then known, the Century to which the kettle traveled is also known to two decimal places. Dozens of ampules were thus sent back at various thrust levels and a calibration curve set up. The curve was a check against ampules sent not all the way into the Primitive but into the early Centuries of Eternity where direct observations could also be made.
"Naturally, there were failures. The first few ampules were lost until we learned to allow for the not too major geological changes between the late Primitive and the 575th. Then, three of the ampules later on never showed up in the 575th. Presumably, something went wrong with the discharge mechanism and they were buried too deeply in the mountain for detection. We stopped our experiments when the level of radiation grew so high that we feared that some of the Primitive inhabitants might detect and wonder what radioactive artifacts might be doing in the region. But we had enough for our purposes and we are certain we can send back a man to any hundredth of a Century of the Primitive that is desired.
"You follow all this, Cooper, don't you?"
Cooper said, "Perfectly, Computer Twissell. I have seen the calibration curve without understanding the purpose at the time. It is quite clear now."
But Harlan was exceedingly interested now. He stared at the measured arc marked off in centuries. The shining arc was porcelain on metal and the fine lines divided it into Centuries, Decicenturies and Centicenturies. Silvery metal gleamed thinly through the porcelainpenetrating lines, marking them clearly. The figures were as finely done and, bending close, Harlan could make out the Centuries from 17 to 27. The hairline was fixed at the 23.17th Century mark.
He had seen similar time-gauges and almost automatically he reached to the pressure-control lever. It did not respond to his grasp. The hairline remained in place.
He nearly jumped when Twissell's voice suddenly addressed him.
"Technician Harlan!"
He cried, "Yes, Computer," then remembered that he could not be heard. He stepped to the window and nodded.
Twissell said, almost as though chiming in with Harlan's thoughts, "The time-gauge is set for a thrust back to the 23.17th. That requires no adjustment. Your only task is to pour energy through at the proper moment in physiotime. There is a chronometer to the right of the gauge. Nod if you see it."
Harlan nodded.
"It will reach zero-point backward. At the minus-fifteen-second point, align the contact points. It's simple. You see how?"
Harlan nodded again.
Twissell went on, "Synchronization is not vital. You can do it at minus fourteen or thirteen or even minus five seconds, but please make every effort to stay this side of minus ten for safety's sake. Once you've closed contact, a synchronized force-gear will do the rest and make certain that the final energy thrust will occur precisely at time zero. Understood?"
Harlan nodded still again. He understood more than Twissell said. If he himself did not align the points by minus ten, it would be taken care of from without.
Harlan thought grimly: There'll be no need for outsiders.
Twissell said, "We have thirty physiominutes left. Cooper and I will leave to check on the supplies."
They left. The door closed behind them, and Harlan was left alone with the thrust control, the time (already moving slowly backward toward zero)-and a resolute knowledge of what must be done.


Harlan turned away from the window. He put his hand inside his pocket and half withdrew the neuronic whip it still contained. Through all this he had kept the whip. His hand shook a little.
An earlier thought recurred: a Samson-smash of the temple!
A corner of his mind wondered sickly: How many Eternals have ever heard of Samson? How many know how he died?
There were only twenty-five minutes left. He was not certain how long the operation would take. He was not really certain it would work at all.
But what choice had he? His damp fingers almost dropped the weapon before he succeeded in unhinging the butt.
He worked rapidly and in complete absorption. Of all the aspects of what he planned, the possibility of his own passage into nonexistence occupied his mind the least and bothered him not at all.


At minus one minute Harlan was standing at the controls.
Detachedly he thought: The last minute of life?
Nothing in the room was visible to him but the backward sweep of the red hairline that marked the passing seconds.
Minus thirty seconds.
He thought: It will not hurt. It is not death.
He tried to think only of Noys.
Minus fifteen seconds.
Noys!
Harlan's left hand moved a switch down toward contact. Not hastily!
Minus twelve seconds.
Contact!
The force-gear would take over now. Thrust would come at zero time. And that left Harlan one last manipulation. The Samson-smash!
His right hand moved. He did not look at his right hand.
Minus five seconds.
Noys!
His right hand mo-ZERO-ved again, spasmodically. He did not look at it.
Was this nonexistence?


Not yet. Nonexistence not yet.
Harlan stared out the window. He did not move. Time passed and he was unaware of its passage.
The room was empty. Where the giant, enclosed kettle had been was nothing. Metal blocks that had served as its base sat emptily, lifting their huge strength against air.
Twissell, strangely small and dwarfed in the room that had become a waiting cavern, was the only thing that moved as he tramped edgily this way and that.
Harlan's eyes followed him for a moment and then left him.
Then, without any sound or stir, the kettle was back in the spot it had left. Its passage across the hairline from time past to time present did not as much as disturb a molecule of air.
Twissell was hidden from Harlan's eyes by the bulk of the kettle, but then he rounded it, came into view. He was running.
A flick of his hand was enough to activate the mechanism that opened the door of the control room. He hurtled inside, shouting with an almost lyrical excitement. "It's done. It's done. We've closed the circle." He had breath to say no more.
Harlan made no answer.
Twissell stared out the window, his hands flat against the glass. Harlan noted the blotches of age upon them and the way in which they trembled. It was as though his mind no longer had the ability or the strength to filter the important from the inconsequential, but were selecting observational material in a purely random manner.
Wearily he thought: What does it matter? What does anything matter now?
Twissell said (Harlan heard him dimly), "I'll tell you now that I've been more anxious than I cared to admit. Sennor used to say once that this whole thing was impossible. He insisted something must happen to stop it-- What's the matter?"
He had turned at Harlan's odd grunt.
Harlan shook his head, managed a choked "Nothing."
Twissell left it at that and turned away. It was doubtful whether he spoke to Harlan or to the air. It was as though he were allowing years of pent-up anxieties to escape in words.
"Sennor," he said, "was the doubter. We reasoned with him and argued. We used mathematics and presented the results of generations of research that had preceded us in the physiotime of Eternity. He put it all to one side and presented his case by quoting the man-meetshimself paradox. You heard him talk about it. It's his favorite.
"We knew our own future, Sennor said. I, Twissell, knew, for instance, that I would survive, despite the fact that I would be quite old, until Cooper made his trip past the downwhen terminus. I knew other details of my future, the things I would do.
"Impossible, he would say. Reality must change to correct your knowledge, even if it meant the circle would never close and Eternity never established.
"Why he argued so, I don't know. Perhaps he honestly believed it, perhaps it was an intellectual game with him, perhaps it was just the desire to shock the rest of us with an unpopular viewpoint. In any case, the project proceeded and some of the memoir began to be fulfilled. We located Cooper, for instance, in the Century and Reality that the memoir gave us. Sennor's case was exploded by that alone, but it didn't bother him. By that time, he had grown interested in something else.
"And yet, and yet"-he laughed gently, with more than a trace of embarrassment, and let his cigarette, unnoticed, burn down nearly to his fingers-"you know I was never quite easy in my mind. Something might happen. The Reality in which Eternity was established might change in some way in order to prevent what Sennor called a paradox. It would have to change to one in which Eternity would not exist. Sometimes, in the dark of a sleeping period, when I couldn't sleep, I could almost persuade myself that that was indeed so. -and now it's all over and I laugh at myself as a senile fool."
Harlan said in a low voice, "Computer Sennor was right."
Twissell whirled. "What?"
"The project failed." Harlan's mind was coming out of the shadows (why, and into what, he was not sure). "The circle is not complete."
"What are you talking about?" Twissell's old hands fell on Harlan's shoulders with surprising strength. "You're ill, boy. The strain."
"Not ill. Sick of everything. You. Me. Not ill. The gauge. See for yourself."
"The gauge?" The hairline on the gauge stood at the 27th Century, hard against the right-hand extreme. "What happened?" The joy was gone from his face. Horror replaced it.
Harlan grew matter-of-fact. "I melted the locking mechanism, freed the thrust control."
"How could you--"
"I had a neuronic whip. I broke it open and used its micro-pile energy source in one flash, like a torch. There's what's left of it." He kicked at a small heap of metal fragments in one corner.
Twissell wasn't taking it in. "In the 27th? You mean Cooper's in the 27th--"
"I don't know where he is," said Harlan dully. "I shifted the thrust control downwhen, further down than the z4th. I don't know where. I didn't look. Then I brought it back. I still didn't look."
Twissell stared at him, his face a pale, unhealthy yellowish color, his lower lip trembling.
"I don't know where he is now," said Harlan. "He's lost in the Primitive. The circle is broken. I thought everything would end when I made the stroke. At zero time. That's silly. We've got to wait. There'll be a moment in physiotime when Cooper will realize he's in the wrong Century, when he'll do something against the memoir, when he-" He broke off, then broke into a forced and creaky laughter. "What's the difference? It's only a delay till Cooper makes the final break in the circle. There's no way of stopping it. Minutes, hours, days. What's the difference? When the delay is done, there will be no more Eternity. Do you hear me? It will be the end of Eternity.






14. The Earlier Crime


"Why? Why?"
Twissell looked helplessly from the gauge to the Technician, his eyes mirroring the puzzled frustration in his voice.
Harlan lifted his head. He had only one word to say. "Noys!"
Twissell said, "The woman you took into Eternity?"
Harlan smiled bitterly, said nothing.
Twissell said, "What has she to do with this? Great Time, I don't understand, boy."
"What is there to understand?" Harlan burned with sorrow. "Why do you pretend ignorance? I had a woman. I was happy and so was she. We harmed no one. She did not exist in the new Reality. What differ. ence would it have made to anyone?"
Twissell tried vainly to interrupt.
Harlan shouted. "But there are rules in Eternity, aren't there? I know them all. Liaisons require permission; liaisons require computations; liaisons require status; liaisons are tricky things. What were you planning for Noys when all this was over? A seat in a crashing rocket? Or a more comfortable position as community mistress for worthy Computers? You won't make any plans now, I think."
He ended in a kind of despair and Twissell moved quickly to the Communiplate. Its function as a transmitter had obviously been restored.
The Computer shouted into it till he aroused an answer. Then he said, "This is Twissell. No one is to be allowed in here. No one. No one. Do you understand?Ö Then see to it. It goes for members of the Allwhen Council. It goes for them particularly."
He turned back to Harlan, saying abstractedly, "They'll do it because I'm old and senior member of the Council and because they think I'm cranky and queer. They give in to me because I'm cranky and queer." For a moment he fell into a ruminative silence. Then he said, "Do you think I'm queer?" and his face turned swiftly up to Harlan's like that of a seamed monkey.
Harlan thought: Great Time, the man's mad. The shock has driven him mad.
He took a step backward, automatically aghast at being trapped with a madman. Then he steadied. The man, be he ever so mad, was feeble, and even madness would end soon.
Soon? Why not at once? What delayed the end of Eternity?
Twissell said (he had no cigarette in his fingers; his hand made no move to take one) in a quiet insinuating voice, "You haven't answered me. Do you think I'm queer? I suppose you do. Too queer to talk to. If you had thought of me as a friend instead of as a crotchety old man, whimsical and unpredictable, you would have spoken openly to me of your doubts. You would have taken no such action as you did."
Harlan frowned. The man thought Harlan was mad. That was it!
He said angrily, "My action was the right one. I'm quite sane."
Twissell said, "I told you the girl was in no danger, you know."
"I was a fool to believe that even for a while. I was a fool to believe the Council would be just to a Technician."
"Who told you the Council knew of any of this?"
"Finge knew of it and sent in a report concerning it to the Council."
"And how do you know that?"
"I got it out of Finge at the point of a neuronic whip. The business end of a whip abolishes comparative status."
"The same whip that did this?" Twissell pointed to the gauge with its blob of molten metal perched wryly above the face of the dial.
"Yes."
"A busy whip." Then, sharply, "Do you know why Finge took it to the Council instead of handling the matter himself?"
"Because he hated me and wanted to make certain I lost all status. He wanted Noys."
Twissell said, "You're naÔve! If he had wanted the girl, he could easily have arranged liaison. A Technician would not have been in his way. The man hated me, boy." (Still no cigarette. He looked odd without one and the stained finger he lay on his chest as he spoke the last pronoun looked almost indecently bare.)
"You?"
"There's such a thing, boy, as Council politics. Not every Computer is appointed to the Council. Finge wanted an appointment. Finge is ambitious and wanted it badly. I blocked it because I thought him emotionally unstable. Time, I never fully appreciated how right I wasÖ Look, boy. He knew you were a protÈgÈ of mine. He had seen me take you out of a job as an Observer and make you a master Technician. He saw you working for me steadily. How better could he get back at me and destroy my influence? If he could prove my pet Technician guilty of a terrible crime against Eternity, it would reflect on me. It might force my resignation from the Allwhen Council, and who do you suppose would then be a logical successor?"
His empty hands moved to his lips and when nothing happened, he looked at the space between finger and thumb blankly.
Harlan thought: He's not as calm as he's trying to sound. He can't be. But why does he talk all this nonsense now? With Eternity ending?
Then in agony: But why doesn't it end then? Now!
Twissell said, "When I allowed you to go to Finge just recently, I more than half suspected danger. But Mallansohn's memoir said you were away the last month and no other natural reason for your absence offered itself. Fortunately, Finge underplayed his hand."
"In what way?" asked Harlan wearily. He didn't really care, but Twissell talked and talked and it was easier to take part than to try to shut the sound out of his ears.
Twissell said, "Finge labeled his report: '_In re_ unprofessional conduct of Technician Andrew Harlan.' He was being the faithful Eternal, you see, being cool, impartial, unexcited. He was leaving it to the Council to rage and throw itself at me. Unfortunately for himself, he did not know of your real importance. He did not realize that any report concerning you would be instantly referred to me, unless its supreme importance were made perfectly clear on the very face of things."
"You never spoke to me of this?"
"How could I? I was afraid to do anything that would disturb you with the crisis of the project at hand. I gave you every opportunity to bring your problem to me."
Every opportunity? Harlan's mouth twisted in disbelief, but then he thought of Twissell's weary face on the Communiplate asking him if he had nothing to say to him. That was yesterday. Only yesterday.
Harlan shook his head, but turned his face away now.
Twissell said softly, "I realized at once that he had deliberately goaded you into your-rash action."
Harlan looked up. "You know that?"
"Does that surprise you? I knew Finge was after my neck. I've known it for a long time. I am an old man, boy. I know these things. But there are ways in which doubtful Computers can be checked upon. There are some protective devices, culled out of Time, that are not placed in the museums. There are some that are known to the Council alone."
Harlan thought bitterly of the time-block at the 100,000th.
"From the report and from what I knew independently, it was easy to deduce what must have happened."
Harlan asked suddenly, "I suppose Finge suspected you of spying?"
"He might have. I wouldn't be surprised."
Harlan thought back to his first days with Finge when Twissell first showed his abnormal interest in the young Observer. Finge had known nothing of the Mallansohn project, and he had been interested in Twissell's interference. "Have you ever met Senior Computer Twissell?" he had once asked and, thinking back, Harlan could recall the exact tone of sharp uneasiness in the man's voice. As early as that Finge must have suspected Harlan of being Twissell's finger-man. His enmity and hate must have begun that early.
Twissell was speaking, "So if you had come to me--"
"Come to you?" cried Harlan. "What of the Council?"
"Of the entire Council, only I know."
"You never told them?" Harlan tried to be mocking.
"I never did."
Harlan felt feverish. His clothes were choking him. Was this nightmare to go on forever. Foolish, irrelevant chatter! _For what? Why?_
Why didn't Eternity end? Why didn't the clean peace of non-Reality reach out for them? _Great Time, what was wrong?_
Twissell said, "Don't you believe me?"
Harlan shouted, "Why should I? They came to look at me, didn't they? At that breakfast? Why should they have done that if they didn't know of the report? They came to look at the queer phenomenon who had broken the laws of Eternity but who couldn't be touched for one more day. One more day and then the project would be over. They came to gloat for the tomorrow they were expecting."
"My boy, there was nothing of that. They wanted to see you only because they were human. Councilmen are human too. They could not witness the final kettle drive because the Mallansohn memoir did not place them at the scene. They could not interview Cooper since the memoir made no mention of that either. Yet they wanted something. Father Time, boy, don't you see they would want something? You were as close as they could get, so they brought you close and stared at you."
"I don't believe you."
"It's the truth."
Harlan said, "Is it? And while we ate, Councilman Sennor talked of a man meeting himself. He obviously knew about my illegal trips into the 482nd and my nearly meeting myself. It was his way of poking at me, enjoying himself cutely at my expense."
Twissell said, "Sennor? You worried about Sennor? Do you know the pathetic figure he is? His homewhen is the 803rd, one of the few cultures in which the human body is deliberately disfigured to meet the aesthetic requirements of the time. It is rendered hairless at adolescence.
"Do you know what that means in the continuity of man? Surely you do. A disfigurement sets men apart from their ancestors and descendants. Men of the 803rd are poor risks as Eternals; they are too different from the rest of us. Few are chosen. Sennor is the only one of his Century ever to sit on the Council.
"Don't you see how that affects him? Surely you understand what insecurity means. Did it ever occur to you that a Councilman could be insecure? Sennor has to listen to discussions involving the eradication of his Reality for the very characteristic that makes him so conspicuous among us. And eradicating it would leave him one of a very few in all the generation to be disfigured as he is. Someday it will happen.
"He finds refuge in philosophy. He overcompensates by taking the lead in conversation, by deliberately airing unpopular or unaccepted viewpoints. His man-meeting-himself paradox is a case in point. I told you that he used it to predict disaster for the project and it was we, the Councilmen, that he was attempting to annoy, not you. It had nothing to do with you. Nothing!"
Twissell had grown heated. In the long emotion of his words he seemed to forget where he was and the crisis that faced them, for he slipped back into the quick-gestured, uneasily motioned gnome that Harlan knew so well. He even slipped a cigarette from his sleeve pouch and had all but frictioned it into combustion.
But then he stopped, wheeled, and looked at Harlan again, reaching back through all his own words to what Harlan had last said, as though until that moment, he had not heard them properly.
He said, "What do you mean, you almost met yourself?"
Harlan told him briefly and went on, "You didn't know that?"
"No."
There were a few moments of silence that were as welcome to the feverish Harlan as water would have been.
Twissell said, "Is that it? What if you had met yourself?"
"I didn't."
Twissell ignored that. "There is always room for random variation. With an infinite number of Realities there can be no such thing as determinism. Suppose that in the Mallansohn Reality, in the previous turn of the cycle--"
"The circle goes on forever?" asked Harlan with what wonder he could still find in himself.
"Do you think only twice? Do you think two is a magic number? It's a matter of infinite turns of the circle in finite physiotime. Just as you can draw a pencil round and round the circumference of a circle infinitely yet enclose a finite area. In previous turns of the cycle, you had not met yourself. This one time, the statistical uncertainty of things made it possible for you to meet yourself. Reality had to change to prevent the meeting and in the new Reality, you did not send Cooper back to the 24th but--"
Harlan cried, "What's all this talk about? What are you getting at? It's all done. Everything. Let me alone now! _Let me alone!_"
"I want you to know you've done wrong. I want you to realize you did the wrong thing."
"I didn't. And even if I did, _it's done_."
"But it is not done. Listen just a little while longer." Twissell was wheedling, almost crooning with an agonized gentleness. "You will have your girl. I promised that. I still promise it. She will not be harmed. You will not be harmed. I promise you this. It is my personal guarantee."
Harlan stared at him wide-eyed. "But it's too late. What's the use?"
"It is not too late. Things are not irreparable. With your help, we can succeed yet. I must have your help. You must realize that you did wrong. I am trying to explain this to you. You must want to undo what you have done."
Harlan licked his dry lips with a dry tongue and thought: He is mad. His mind can't accept the truth. -or, does the Council know more?
Did it? Did it? Could it reverse the verdict of the Changes? Could they halt Time or reverse it?
He said, "You locked me in the control room, kept me helpless, you thought, till it was all over."
"You said you were afraid something might go wrong with you; that you might not be able to carry on with your part."
"That was meant to be a threat."
"I took it literally. Forgive me. I must have your help."
It came to that. Harlan's help must be had. Was he mad? Was Harlan mad? Did madness have meaning? Or anything at all, for that matter?
The Council needed his help. For that help they would promise him anything. Noys. Computership. What would they not promise him? And when his help was done with, what would he get? He would not be fooled a second time.
"No!" he said.
"You'll have Noys."
"You mean the Council will be willing to break the laws of Eternity once the danger is safely gone? I don't believe it." How could the danger safely be passed, a sane scrap of his mind demanded. What was this all about?
"The Council will never know."
"Would you be willing to break the laws? You're the ideal Eternal. With the danger gone, you would obey the law. You couldn't act otherwise."
Twissell reddened blotchily, high on each cheekbone. From the old face all shrewdness and strength drained away. There was left only a strange sorrow.
"I will keep my word to you and break the law," said Twissell, "for a reason you don't imagine. I don't know how much time is left us before Eternity disappears. It could be hours; it could be months. But I have spent so much time in the hope of bringing you to reason that I will spend a little more. Will you listen to me? Please?"
Harlan hesitated. Then, out of a conviction of the uselessness of all things as much as out of anything else said wearily, "Go on."


I have heard (began Twissell) that I was born old, that I cut my teeth on a Micro-Computaplex, that I keep my hand computer in a special pocket of my pajamas when I sleep, that my brain is made up of little force-relays in endless parallel hookups and that each corpuscle of my blood is a microscopic spatio-temporal chart floating in computer oil.
All these stories come to me eventually, and I think I must be a little proud of them. Maybe I go around believing them a bit. It's a foolish thing for an old man to do, but it makes life a little easier.
Does that surprise you? That I must find a way to make life easier? I, Senior Computer Twissell, senior member of the Allwhen Council?
Maybe that's why I smoke. Ever think of that? I have to have a reason, you know. Eternity is essentially an unsmoking society, and most of Time is, too. I've thought of that often. I sometimes think it's a rebellion against Eternity. Something to take the place of a greater rebellion that failedÖ
No, it's all right. A tear or two won't hurt me, and it isn't pretense, believe me. It's just that I haven't thought about this for a long time. It isn't pleasant.
It involved a woman, of course, as your affair did. That's not coincidence. It's almost inevitable, if you stop to think of it. An Eternal, who must sell the normal satisfactions of family life for a handful of perforations on foil, is ripe for infection. That's one of the reasons Eternity must take the precautions it does. And, apparently, that's also why Eternals are so ingenious in evading the precautions once in a while.
I remember my woman. It's foolish of me to do so, perhaps. I can't remember anything else about that physiotime. My old colleagues are only names in the record books; the Changes I supervised-all but one-are only items in the Computaplex memory pools. I remember her, though, very well. Perhaps you can understand that.
I had had a long-standing request for liaison in the books; and after I achieved status as a Junior Computer, she was assigned to me. She was a girl of this very Century, the 575th. I didn't see her until after the assignment, of course. She was intelligent and kind. Not beautiful or even pretty, but then, even when young (yes, I was young, never mind the myths) I was not noted for my own looks. We were well suited to one another by temperament, she and I, and if I were a Timed man, I would have been proud to have her as my wife. I told her that many times. I believe it pleased her. I know it was the truth. Not all Eternals, who must take their women as and how Computing permits, are that fortunate.
In that particular Reality, she was to die young, of course, and none of her analogues was available for liaison. At first, I took that philosophically. After all, it was her short lifetime which made it possible for her to live with me without deleteriously affecting Reality.
I am ashamed of that now, of the fact that I was glad she had a short time to live. Just at first, that is. Just at first.
I visited her as often as spatio-temporal charting allowed. I squeezed every minute out of it, giving up meals and sleep when necessary, shifting my labor load shamelessly whenever I could. Her amiability passed the heights of my expectations, and I was in love. I put it bluntly. My experience of love is very small, and understanding it through Observation in Time is a shaky matter. As far as my understanding went, however, I was in love.
What began as the satisfaction of an emotional and physical need became a great deal more. Her imminent death stopped being a convenience and became a calamity. I Life-Plotted her. I didn't go to the Life-Plotting departments, either. I did it myself. That surprises you, I imagine. It was a misdemeanor, but it was nothing compared to the crimes I committed later.
Yes, I, Laban Twissell. Senior Computer Twissell.
Three separate times, a point in physiotime came and passed, during which some simple action of my own might have altered her personal Reality. Naturally, I knew that no such personally motivated Change could possibly be authorized by the Council. Still, I began to feel personally responsible for her death. That was part of my motivation later on, you see.
She became pregnant. I took no action, though I should have. I had worked her Life-Plot, modified to include her relationship with me, and I knew pregnancy to be a high-probability consequence. As you may or may not know, Timed women are occasionally made pregnant by Eternals despite precautions. It is not unheard of. Still, since no Eternal may have a child, such pregnancies as do occur are ended painlessly and safely. There are many methods.
My Life-Plotting had indicated she would die before delivery, so I took no precautions. She was happy in her pregnancy and I wanted her to remain so. So I only watched and tried to smile when she told me she could feel life stirring within her.
But then something happened. She gave birth prematurely-- I don't wonder you look that way. I had a child. A real child of my own. You'll find no other Eternal, perhaps, who can say that. That was more than a misdemeanor. That was a serious felony, but it was still nothing.
I hadn't expected it. Birth and its problems were an aspect of life with which I had had little experience.
I went back to the Life-Plot in panic and found the living child, in an alternate solution to a low-probability forklet I had overlooked. A professional Life-Plotter would not have overlooked it and I had done wrong to trust my own abilities that far.
But what could I do now?
I couldn't kill the child. The mother had two weeks to live. Let the child live with her till then, I thought. Two weeks of happiness is not an exorbitant gift to ask.
The mother died, as foreseen, and in the manner foreseen. I sat in her room, for all the time permitted by the spatio-temporal chart, aching with a sorrow all the keener for my having waited for death, in full knowledge, for over a year. In my arms, I held my son and hers.
ñYes, I let it live. Why do you cry out so? Are you going to condemn me?
You cannot know what it means to hold a little atom of your own life in your arms. I may have a Computaplex for nerves and spatio-temporal charts for a bloodstream, but I do know.
I let it live. I committed that crime, too. I put it in the charge of an appropriate organization and returned when I could (in strict temporal sequence, held even with physiotime) to make necessary payments and to watch the boy grow.
Two years went by that way. Periodically, I checked the boy's LifePlot (I was used to breaking that particular rule, by now) and was pleased to find that there were no signs of deleterious effects on the then-current Reality at probability levels over 0.0001. The boy learned to walk and mispronounced a few words. He was not taught to call me "daddy." Whatever speculations the Timed people of the child-care institution might have made concerning me I don't know. They took their money and said nothing.
Then, when the two years had passed, the necessities of a Change that included the 575th at one wing was brought up before the Allwhen Council. I, having been lately promoted to Assistant Computer, was placed in charge. It was the first Change ever left to my sole supervision.
I was proud, of course, but also apprehensive. My son was an intruder in the Reality. He could scarcely be expected to have analogues. Thought of his passage into nonexistence saddened me.
I worked at the Change and I flatter myself even yet that I did a flawless job. My first one. But I succumbed to a temptation. I succumbed to it all the more easily because it was becoming an old story now for me. I was a hardened criminal, a habituÈ of crime. I worked out a new Life-Plot for my son under the new Reality, certain of what I would find.
But then for twenty-four hours, without eating or sleeping, I sat in my office, striving with the completed Life-Plot, tearing at it in a despairing effort to find an error.
There was no error.
The next day, holding back my solution to the Change, I worked out a spatio-temporal chart, using rough methods of approximation (after all, the Reality was not to last long) and entered Time at a point more than thirty years upwhen from the birth of my child.
He was thirty-four years old, as old as I myself. I introduced myself as a distant relation, making use of my knowledge of his mother's family, to do so. He had no knowledge of his father, no memory of my visits to him in his infancy.
He was an aeronautical engineer. The 575th was expert in half a dozen varieties of air travel (as it still is in the current Reality), and my son was a happy and successful member of his society. He was married to an ardently enamored girl, but would have no children. Nor would the girl have married at all in the Reality in which my son had not existed. I had known that from the beginning. I had known there would be no deleterious affect on Reality. Otherwise, I might not have found it in my heart to let the boy live. I am not completely abandoned.
I spent the day with my son. I spoke to him formally, smiled politely, took my leave coolly when the spatio-temporal chart dictated. But un derneath all that, I watched and absorbed every action, filling myself with him, and trying to live one day at least out of a Reality that the next day (by physiotime) would no longer have existed.
How I longed to visit my wife one last time, too, during that portion of Time in which she lived, but I had used every second that had been available to me. I dared not even enter Time to see her, unseen.
I returned to Eternity and spent one last horrible night wrestling futilely against what must be. The next morning I handed in my computations together with my recommendations for Change.


Twissell's voice had lowered to a whisper and now it stopped. He sat there with his shoulders bent, his eyes fixed on the floor between his knees, and his fingers twisting slowly into and out of a knotted clasp.
Harlan, waiting vainly for another sentence out of the old man, cleared his throat. He found himself pitying the man, pitying him despite the many crimes he had committed. He said, "And that's all?"
Twissell whispered, "No, the worst-the worst-- An analogue of my son did exist. In the new Reality, he existed-as a paraplegic from the age of four. Forty-two years in bed, under circumstances that barred me from arranging to have the nerve-regenerating techniques of the 900's applied to his case, or even for arranging to have his life ended painlessly.
"That new Reality still exists. My son is still out there in the appropriate portion of the Century. I did that to him. It was my mind and my Computaplex that discovered this new life for him, and my word that ordered the Change. I had committed a number of crimes for his sake and for his mother's, but that one last deed, though strictly in accordance with my oath as an Eternal, has always seemed to me to be my great crime, the crime."
There was nothing to say, and Harlan said nothing.
Twissell said, "But you see now why I understand your case, why I will be willing to let you have your girl. It would not harm Eternity and, in a way, it would be expiation for my crime."
And Harlan believed. All in one change of mind, he believed!
Harlan sank to his knees and lifted his clenched fists to his temples. He bent his head and rocked slowly as savage despair beat through him.
He had thrown Eternity away, and lost Noys-when, except for his Samson-smash, he might have saved one and kept the other.






15. Search through the Primitive


Twissell was shaking Harlan's shoulders. The old man's voice urgently called his name.
"Harlan! Harlan! For Time's sake, man."
Harlan emerged only slowly from the slough. "What are we to do?"
"Certainly not this. Not despair. To begin with, listen to me. Forget your Technician's view of Eternity and look at it through a Computer's eyes. The view is more sophisticated. When you alter something in Time and create a Reality Change, the Change may take place at once. Why should that be?"
Harlan said shakily, "Because your alteration has made the Change inevitable?"
"Has it? You could go back and reverse your alteration, couldn't you?"
"I suppose so. I never did, though. Or anyone that I heard of."
"Right. There is no intention of reversing an alteration, so it goes through as planned. But here we have something else. An unintentional alteration. You sent Cooper into the wrong Century and now I firmly intend to reverse that alteration and bring Cooper back here."
"For Time's sake, how?"
"I'm not sure yet, but there must be a way. If there were no way, the alteration would be irreversible; Change would come at once. But Change has not come. We are still in the Reality of the Mallansohn memoir. That means the alteration is reversible and will be reversed."
"What?" Harlan's nightmare was expanding and swirling, growing murkier and more engulfing.
"There must be some way of knitting the circle in Time together again and our ability to find the way to do it must be a high-probability affair. As long as our Reality exists, we can be certain that the solution remains high-probability. If at any moment, you or I make the wrong decision, if the probability of healing the circle falls below some crucial magnitude, Eternity disappears. Do you understand?"
Harlan was not sure that he did. He wasn't trying very hard. Slowly he got to his feet and stumbled his way into a chair. "You mean we can get Cooper back--"
"And send him to the right place, yes. Catch him at the moment he leaves the kettle and he may end up in his proper place in the 24th no more than a few physiohours older; physiodays, at the most. It would be an alteration, of course, but undoubtedly not enough of one. Reality would be rocked, boy, but not upset."
"But how do we get him?"
"We know there's a way, or Eternity wouldn't be existing this moment. As to what that way is, that is why I need you, why I've fought to get you back on my side. You're the expert on the Primitive. Tell me."
"I can't," groaned Harlan.
"You can," insisted Twissell.
There was suddenly no trace of age or weariness in the old man's voice. His eyes were ablaze with the light of combat and he wielded his cigarette like a lance. Even to Harlan's regret-drugged senses the man seemed to be enjoying himself, actually enjoying himself, now that battle had been joined.
"We can reconstruct the event," said Twissell. "Here is the thrust control. You're standing at it, waiting for the signal. It comes. You make contact and at the same time squeeze the power thrust in the downwhen direction. How far?"
"I don't know, I tell you. I don't know."
"You don't know, but your muscles do. Stand there and take the controls in your hand. Get hold of yourself. Take them, boy. You're waiting for the signal. You're hating me. You're hating the Council. You're hating Eternity. You're wearying your heart out for Noys. Put yourself back at that moment. Feel what you felt then. Now I'll set the clock in motion again. I'll give you one minute, boy, to remember your emotions and force them back into your thalamus. Then, at the approach of zero, let your right hand jerk the control as it had done before. Then take your hand away! Don't move it back again. Are you ready?"
"I don't think I can do it."
"You don't think-- Father Time, you have no choice. Is there another way you can get back your girl?"
There wasn't. Harlan forced himself back to the controls, and as he did so emotion flooded back. He did not have to call on it. Repeating the physical movements brought them back. The red hairline on the clock started moving.
Detachedly he thought: The last minute of life?
Minus thirty seconds.
He thought: It will not hurt. It is not death.
He tried to think only of Noys.
Minus fifteen seconds.
Noys!
Harlan's left hand moved a switch down toward contact.
Minus twelve seconds.
Contact!
His right hand moved.
Minus five seconds.
Noys!
His right hand mo-ZERO-ved spasmodically.
He jumped away, panting.
Twissell came forward, peering at the dial. "Twentieth Century," he said. "Nineteen point three eight, to be exact."
Harlan choked out, "I don't know. I tried to feel the same, but it was different. I knew what I was doing and that made it different."
Twissell said, "I know, I know. Maybe it's all wrong. Call it a first approximation." He paused a moment in mental calculation, took a pocket computer half out of its container and thrust it back without consulting it. "To Time with the decimal points. Say the probability is 0.99 that you sent him back to the second quarter of the 20th. Somewhere between 19.25 and 19.50. All right?"
"I don't know."
"Well, now, look. If I make a firm decision to concentrate on that part of the Primitive to the exclusion of all else and if I am wrong, the chances are that I will have lost my chance to keep the circle in time closed and Eternity will disappear. The decision itself will be the crucial point, the Minimum Necessary Change, the M.N.C., to bring about the Change. I now make the decision. I decide, definitely--"
Harlan, looked about cautiously, as though Reality had grown so fragile that a sudden head movement might shatter it.
Harlan said, "I'm thoroughly conscious of Eternity." (Twissell's normality had infected him to the point where his voice sounded firm in his own ears.)
"Then Eternity still exists," said Twissell in a blunt, matter-of-fact manner, "and we have made the right decision. Now there's nothing more to do here for the while. Let's get to my office and we can let the subcommittee of the Council swarm over this place, if that will make them any happier. As far as they are concerned, the project has ended successfully. If it doesn't, they'll never know. Nor we."


Twissell studied his cigarette and said, "The question that now confronts us is this: What will Cooper do when he finds himself in the wrong Century?"
"I don't know."
"One thing is obvious. He's a bright lad, intelligent, imaginative, wouldn't you say?"
"Well, he's Mallansohn."
"Exactly. And he wondered if he would end up wrong. One of his last questions was: What if I don't end up in the right spot? Do you remember?"
"Well?" Harlan had no idea where this was leading.
"So he is mentally prepared for being displaced in Time. He will do something. Try to reach us. Try to leave traces for us. Remember, for part of his life he was an Eternal. That's an important thing." Twissell blew a smoke ring, hooked it with a finger, and watched it curl about and break up. "He's used to the notion of communication across Time. He is not likely to surrender to the thought of being marooned in Time. He'll know that we're looking for him."
Harlan said, "Without kettles and with no Eternity in the 20th, how would he go about communicating with us?"
"With you, Technician, with you. Use the singular. You're our expert on the Primitive. You taught Cooper about the Primitive. You're the one he would expect to be capable of finding his traces."
"What traces, Computer?"
Twissell's shrewd old face stared up at Harlan, its lines crinkling. "It was intended to leave Cooper in the Primitive. He is without the protection of an enclosing shield of physiotime. His entire life is woven into the fabric of Time and will remain so until you and I reverse the alteration. Likewise woven into the fabric of Time is any artifact, sign, or message he may have left for us. Surely there must be particular sources you used in studying the 20th Century. Documents, archives, films, artifacts, reference works. I mean primary sources, dating from the Time itself."
"Yes."
"And he studied them with you?"
"Yes."
"And is there any particular reference that was your favorite, one that he knew you were intimately acquainted with, so that you would recognize in it some reference to himself?"
"I see what you're driving at, of course," said Harlan. He grew thoughtful.
"Well?" asked Twissell with an edge of impatience.
Harlan said, "My news magazines, almost surely. News magazines were a phenomenon of the early 20's. The one of which I have nearly a complete set dates from early in the 20th and continues well into the 22nd."
"Good. Now is there any way, do you suppose, in which Cooper could make use of that news magazine to carry a message? Remember, he'd know you'd be reading the periodical, that you'd be acquainted with it, that you'd know your way about in it."
"I don't know." Harlan shook his head. "The magazine affected an artificial style. It was selective rather than inclusive and quite unpredictable. It would be difficult or even impossible to rely on its printing something you would plan to have it print. Cooper couldn't very well create news and be sure of its appearance. Even if Cooper managed to get a position on its editorial staff, which is very unlikely, he couldn't be certain that his exact wording would pass the various editors. I don't see it, Computer."
Twissell said, "For Time's sake, think! Concentrate on that news magazine. You're in the 20th and you're Cooper with his education and background. You taught the boy, Harlan. You molded his thinking. Now what would he do? How would he go about placing something in the magazine; something with the exact wording he wants?"
Harlan's eyes widened. "An advertisement!"
"What?"
"An advertisement. A paid notice which they would be compelled to print exactly as requested. Cooper and I discussed them occasionally."
"Ah, yes. They have that sort of thing in the 186th," said Twissell.
"Not like the 20th. The 20th is peak in that respect. The cultural milieu--"
"Considering the advertisement now," interposed Twissell hastily, "what kind would it be?"
"I wish I knew."
Twissell stared at the lighted end of his cigarette as though seeking inspiration. "He can't say anything directly. He can't say: 'Cooper of the 78th, stranded in the 20th and calling Eternity--'"
"How can you be sure?"
"Impossible! To give the 20th information we know they did not have would be as damaging to the Mallansohn circle as would wrong action on our part. We're still here, so in his whole lifetime in the current Reality of the Primitive he's done no harm of that sort."
"Besides which," said Harlan, retreating from the contemplation of the circular reasoning which seemed to bother Twissell so little, "the news magazine is not likely to agree to publish anything which seems mad to it or which it cannot understand. It would suspect fraud or some form of illegality and would not wish to be implicated. So Cooper couldn't use Standard Intertemporal for his message."
"It would have to be something subtle," said Twissell. "He would have to use indirection. He would have to place an advertisement that would seem perfectly normal to the men of the Primitive. Perfectly normal! And yet something that is obvious to us, once we knew what we were searching for. Very obvious. Obvious at a glance because it would have to be found among uncounted individual items. How big do you suppose it would be, Harlan? Are those advertisements expensive?"
"Quite expensive, I believe."
"And Cooper would have to hoard his money. Besides which, to avoid the wrong kind of attention, it would have to be small, anyway. Guess, Harlan. How large?"
Harlan spread his hands. "Half a column?"
"Column?"
"They were printed magazines, you know. On paper. With print arranged in columns."
"Oh yes. I can't seem to separate literature and film somehowÖ Well, we have a first approximation of another sort now. We must look for a half-column advertisement which will, practically at a glance, give evidence that the man who placed it came from another Century (in the upwhen direction, of course) and yet which is so normal an advertisement that no man of that Century would see anything suspicious in it."
Harlan said, "What if I don't find it?"
"You will. Eternity exists, doesn't it. As long as it does, we're on the right track. Tell me, can you recall such an advertisement in your work with Cooper? Anything which struck you, even momentarily, as odd, queer, unusual, subtly wrong."
"No."
"I don't want an answer so quickly. Take five minutes and think."
"No point. At the time I was going over the news magazines with Cooper, he hadn't been in the 20th."
"Please, boy. Use your head. Sending Cooper to the 20th has introduced an alteration. There's no Change; it isn't an irreversible alteration. But there have been some changes with a small 'c,' or micro-changes, as it is usually referred to in Computation. At the instant Cooper was sent to the 20th, the advertisement appeared in the appropriate issue of the magazine. Your own Reality has micro-changed in the sense that you may have looked at the page with that advertisement on it rather than one without that advertisement as you did in the previous Reality. Do you understand?"
Harlan was again bewildered, almost as much at the ease with which Twissell picked his way through the jungle of temporal logic, as at the "paradoxes" of Time. He shook his head, "I remember nothing of the sort."
"Well, then, where do you keep the files of that periodical?"
"I had a special library built on Level Two, using the Cooper priority."
"Good enough," said Twissell. "Let's go there. Now!"


Harlan watched Twissell stare curiously at the old, bound volumes in the library and then take one down. They were so old that the fragile paper had to be preserved by special methods and they creaked under Twissell's insufficiently gentle handling.
Harlan winced. In better times he would have ordered Twissell away from the books, Senior Computer though he was.
The old man peered through the crinkling pages and silently mouthed the archaic words. "This is the English the linguists are always talking about, isn't it?" he asked, tapping a page.
"Yes. English," muttered Harlan.
Twissell put the volume back. "Heavy and clumsy."
Harlan shrugged. To be sure, most of the Centuries of Eternity were film eras. A respectable minority were molecular-recording eras. Still, print and paper were not unheard of.
He said, "Books don't require the investment in technology that films do."
Twissell rubbed his chin. "Quite. Shall we get started?"
He took another volume down from the shelf, opening it at random and staring at the page with odd intentness.
Harlan thought: Does the man think he's going to hit the solution by a lucky stab?
The thought might have been correct, for Twissell, meeting Harlan's appraising eyes, reddened and put the book back.
Harlan took the first volume of the 19.25th Centicentury and began turning the pages regularly. Only his right hand and his eyes moved. The rest of his body remained at rigid attention.
At what seemed aeonic intervals to himself Harlan rose, grunting, for a new volume. On those occasions there would be the coffee break or the sandwich break or the other breaks.
Harlan said heavily, "It's useless your staying."
Twissell said, "Do I bother you?"
"No."
"Then I'll stay," muttered Twissell. Throughout he wandered occasionally to the bookshelves, staring helplessly at the bindings. The sparks of his furious cigarettes burned his finger ends at times, but he disregarded them.
A physioday ended.


Sleep was poor and sparse. Midmorning, between two volumes, Twissell lingered over his last sip of coffee and said, "I wonder sometimes why I didn't throw up my Computership after the matter of my-- You know."
Harlan nodded.
"I felt like it," the old man went on. "I felt like it. For physiomonths, I hoped desperately that no Changes would come my way. I got morbid about it. I began to wonder if Changes were right. Funny, the tricks emotions will play on you.
"You know Primitive history, Harlan. You know what it was like. Its Reality flowed blindly along the line of maximum probability. If that maximum probability involved a pandemic, or ten Centuries of slave economy, a breakdown of technology, or even a-a-let's see, what's really bad-even an atomic war if one had been possible then, why, by Time, it happened. There was nothing to stop it.
"But where Eternity exists, that's been stopped. Upwhen from the 28th, things like that don't happen. Father Time, we've lifted our Reality to a level of well-being far beyond anything Primitive times could imagine; to a level which, but for the interference of Eternity, would have been very low probability indeed."
Harlan thought in shame: What's he trying to do? Get me to work harder? I'm doing my best.
Twissell said, "If we miss our chance now, Eternity disappears, probably through all of physiotime. And in one vast Change all Reality reverts to maximum probability with, I am positive, atomic warfare and the end of man."
Harlan said, "I'd better get on to the next volume."


At the next break Twissell said helplessly, "There's so much to do. Isn't there a faster way?"
Harlan said, "Name it. To me it seems that I must look at every single page. And look at every part of it, too. How can I do it faster?"
Methodically he turned the pages.
"Eventually," said Harlan, "the print starts blurring and that means it's time for sleep."
A second physioday ended.


At 10:22 A.M., Standard Physiotime, of the third physioday of the search Harlan stared at a page in quiet wonder and said, "This is it!"
Twissell didn't absorb the statement. He said, "What?"
Harlan looked up, his face twisted with astonishment. "You know, I didn't believe it. By Time, I never really believed it, even while you were working out all that rigmarole about news magazines and advertisements."
Twissell had absorbed it now. "_You've found it!_"
He leaped at the volume Harlan was holding, clutching at it with shaking fingers.
Harlan held it out of reach and slammed the volume shut. "Just a moment. You won't find it, even if I showed you the page."
"What are you doing?" shrieked Twissell. "You've lost it."
"It's not lost. I know where it is. But first--"
"First what?"
Harlan said, "There's one point remaining, Computer Twissell. You say I can have Noys. Bring her to me, then. Let me see her."
Twissell stared at Harlan, his thin white hair in disarray. "Are you joking?"
"No," said Harlan sharply, "I'm not joking. You assured me that you would make arrangments- Are you joking? Noys and I would be together. You promised that."
"Yes, I did. That part's settled."
"Then produce her alive, well, and untouched."
"But I don't understand you. I don't have her. No one has. She's still in the far upwhen, where Finge reported her to be. No one has touched her. Great Time, I told you she was safe."
Harlan stared at the old man and grew tense. He said, chokingly, "You're playing with words. All right, she's in the far upwhen, but what good is that to me? Take down the barrier at the 100,000th-"
"The what?"
"The barrier. The kettle won't pass it."
"You never said anything of this," said Twissell wildly.
"I haven't?" said Harlan with sharp surprise. Hadn't he? He had thought of it often enough. Had he never said a word about it? He couldn't recall, at that. But then he hardened.
He said, "All right. I tell you now. Take it down."
"But the thing is impossible. A barrier against the kettle? A temporal barrier?"
"Are you telling me you didn't put one up?"
"I didn't. By Time, I swear it."
"Then-then--" Harlan felt himself grow pale. "Then the Council did it. They know of all this and they've taken action independently of you and-and by all of Time and Reality, they can whistle for their ad and for Cooper, for Mallansohn and all of Eternity. They'll have none of it. None of it."
"Wait. Wait." Twissell yanked despairingly at Harlan's elbow. "Keep hold of yourself. Think, boy, think. The Council put up no barrier."
"It's there."
"But they can't have put up such a barrier. No one could have. It's theoretically impossible."
"You don't know it all. It's there."
"I know more than anyone else on the Council and such a thing is impossible."
"But it's there."
"But if it is--"
And Harlan grew sufficiently aware of his surroundings to realize that there was a kind of abject fear in Twissell's eyes; a fear that had not been there even when he first learned of Cooper's misdirection and of the impending end of Eternity.






16. The Hidden Centuries


Andrew Harlan watched the men at work with abstracted eyes. They ignored him politely because he was a Technician. Ordinarily he would have ignored them somewhat less politely because they were Maintenance men. But now he watched them and, in his misery, he even caught himself envying them.
They were service personnel from the Department of Intertemporal Transportation, in dun-gray uniforms with shoulder patches showing a red, double-headed arrow against a black background. They used intricate force-field equipment to test the kettle motors and the degrees of hyper-freedom along the kettleways. They had, Harlan imagined, little theoretical knowledge of temporal engineering, but it was obvious that they had a vast practical knowledge of the subject.
Harlan had not learned much concerning Maintenance when he was a Cub. Or, to put it more accurately, he had not really wished to learn. Cubs who did not make the grade were put into Maintenance. The "unspecialized profession" (as the euphemism had it) was the hallmark of failure and the average Cub automatically avoided the subject.
Yet now, as he watched the Maintenance men at work, they seemed to Harlan to be quietly, tensionlessly efficient, reasonably happy.
Why not? They outnumbered the Specialists, the "true Eternals," ten to one. They had a society of their own, residential levels devoted to them, pleasures of their own. Their labor was fixed at so many hours per physioday and there was no social pressure in their case to make them relate their spare-time activity to their profession. They had time, as Specialists did not, to devote to the literature and film dramatizations culled out of the various Realities.
It was they, after all, who probably had the better-rounded personalities. It was the Specialist's life which was harried and affected, artificial in comparison with the sweet and simple life in Maintenance.
Maintenance was the foundation of Eternity. Strange that such an obvious fact had not struck him earlier. They supervised the importation of food and water from Time, the disposal of waste, the functioning of the power plants. They kept all the machinery of Eternity running smoothly. If every Specialist were to die of a stroke on the spot, Maintenance could keep Eternity going indefinitely. Yet were Maintenance to disappear, the Specialists would have to abandon Eternity in days or die miserably.
Did Maintenance men resent the loss of their homewhens, or their womanless, childless lives? Was security from poverty, disease, and Reality Change sufficient compensation? Were their views ever consuited on any matter of importance? Harlan felt some of the fire of the social reformer within him.
Senior Computer Twissell broke Harlan's train of thought by bustling in at a half run, looking even more haunted than he had an hour before, when he had left, with Maintenance already at work.
Harlan thought: How does he keep it up? He's an old man.
Twissell glanced about him with birdlike brightness as the men automatically straightened up to respectful attention.
He said, "What about the kettleways?"
One of the men responded, "Nothing wrong, sir. The ways are clear, the fields mesh."
"You've checked everything?"
"Yes, sir. As far upwhen as the Department's stations go."
Twissell said, "Then go."
There was no mistaking the brusque insistence of his dismissal. They bowed respectfully, turned, and hastened out briskly.
Twissell and Harlan were alone in the kettleways.
Twissell turned to him. "You'll stay here. Please."
Harlan shook his head. "I must go."
Twissell said, "Surely you understand. If anything happens to me, you still know how to find Cooper. If anything happens to you, what can I or any Eternal or any combination of Eternals do alone?"
Harlan shook his head again.
Twissell put a cigarette between his lips. He said, "Sennor is suspicious. He's called me several times in the last two physiodays. Why am I in seclusion, he wants to know. When he finds out I've ordered a complete overhaul of the kettleway machineryÖ I must go now, Harlan. I can't delay."
"I don't want delay. I'm ready."
"You insist on going?"
"If there's no barrier, there'll be no danger. Even if there is, I've been there already and come back. What are you afraid of, Computer?"
"I don't want to risk anything I don't have to."
"Then use your logic, Computer. Make the decision that I'm to go with you. If Eternity still exists after that, then it means that the circle can still be closed. It means we'll survive. If it's a wrong decision, then Eternity will pass into nonexistence, but it will anyway if I don't go, because without Noys, I'll make no move to get Cooper. I swear it."
Twissell said, "I'll bring her back to you."
"If it is so simple and safe, there will be no harm if I come along."
Twissell was in an obvious torture of hesitation. He said gruffly, "Well, then, come!"
And Eternity survived.


Twissell's haunted look did not disappear once they were within the kettle. He stared at the skimming figures of the temporometer. Even the scaler gauge, which measured in units of Kilocenturies, and which the men had adjusted for this particular purpose, was clicking at minute intervals.
He said, "You should not have come."
Harlan shrugged. "Why not?"
"It disturbs me. No sensible reason. Call it a long-standing superstition of mine. It makes me restless." He clasped his hands together, holding them tightly.
Harlan said, "I don't understand you."
Twissell seemed eager to talk, as though to exorcise some mental demon. He said, "Maybe you'll appreciate this, at that. You're the expert on the Primitive. How long did man exist in the Primitive?"
Harlan said, "Ten thousand Centuries. Fifteen thousand, maybe."
"Yes. Beginning as a kind of primitive apelike creature and ending as Homo sapiens. Right?"
"It's common knowledge. Yes."
"Then it must be common knowledge that evolution proceeds at a fairly rapid pace. Fifteen thousand Centuries from ape to Homo sapiens."
"Well?"
"Well, I'm from a Century in the 30,000's--"
(Harlan could not help starting. He had never known Twissell's homewhen or known of anyone who did.)
"I'm from a Century in the 30,000's," Twissell said again, "and you're from the 95th. The time between our homewhens is twice the total length of time of man's existence in the Primitive, yet what change is there between us? I was born with four fewer teeth than you, and without an appendix. The physiological differences about end with that. Our metabolism is almost the same. The major difference is that your body can synthesize the steroid nucleus and my body can't, so that I require cholesterol in my diet and you don't. I was able to breed with a woman of the 575th. That's how undifferentiated with time the species is."
Harlan was unimpressed. He had never questioned the basic identity of man throughout the Centuries. It was one of those things you lived with and took for granted. He said, "There have been cases of species living unchanged through millions of Centuries."
"Not many, though. And it remains a fact that the cessation of human evolution seems to coincide with the development of Eternity. Just coincidence? It's not a question which is considered, except by a few here and there like Sennor, and I've never been a Serinor. I didn't believe speculation was proper. If something couldn't be checked by a Computaplex, it had no business taking up the time of a Computer. And yet, in my younger days, I sometimes thought--"
"Of what?" Harlan thought: Well, it's something to listen to, anyway.
"I sometimes thought about Eternity as it was when it was first established. It stretched over just a few Centuries in the 30's and 40's, and its function was mostly trade. It interested itself in the ref orestation of denuded areas, shipping topsoil back and forth, fresh water, fine chemicals. Those were simple days.
"But then we discovered Reality Changes. Senior Computer Henry Wadsman, in the dramatic manner with which we are all acquainted, prevented a war by removing the safety brake of a Congressman's ground vehicle. After that, more and more, Eternity shifted its center of gravity from trade to Reality Change. Why?"
Harlan said, "The obvious reason. Betterment of humanity."
"Yes. Yes. In normal times, I think so too. But I'm talking of my nightmare. What if there were another reason, an unexpressed one, an unconscious one. A man who can travel into the indefinite future may meet men as far advanced over himself as he himself is over an ape. Why not?"
"Maybe. But men are men--"
"-even in the 70,000th. Yes, I know. And have our Reality Changes had something to do with it? We bred out the unusual. Even Sennor's homewhen with its hairless creatures is under continual question and that's harmless enough. Perhaps in all honesty, in all sincerity, we've prevented human evolution because we don't want to meet the supermen."
Still no spark was struck. Harlan said, "Then it's done. \Vhat does it matter?"
"But what if the superman exists just the same, further upwhen than we can reach? We control only to the 70,000th. Beyond that are the Hidden Centuries! Why are they hidden? Because evolved man does not want to deal with us and bars us from his time? Why do we allow them to remain hidden? Because we don't want to deal with them and, having failed to enter in our first attempt, we refuse even to make additional attempts? I don't say it's our conscious reason, but conscious or unconscious, it's a reason."
"Grant everything," said Harlan sullenly. "They're out of our reach and we're out of theirs. Live and let live."
Twissell seemed struck by the phrase. "Live and let live. But we don't. We make Changes. The Changes extend only through a few Centuries before temporal inertia causes its effects to die out. You remember Sennor brought that up as one of the unanswered problems of Time at our breakfast. What he might have said was that it's all a matter of statistics. Some Changes affect more Centuries than other. Theoretically, any number of Centuries can be affected by the proper Change; a hundred Centuries, a thousand, a hundred thousand. Evolved man of the Hidden Centuries may know that. Suppose he is disturbed by the possibility that someday a Change may reach him clear to the 200,000th."
"It's useless to worry about such things," said Harlan with the air of a man who had much greater worries.
"But suppose," went on Twissell in a whisper, "they were calm enough as long as we left the Sections of the Hidden Centuries empty. It meant we weren't aggressing. Suppose this truce, or whatever you wish to call it, were broken, and someone appeared to have established permanent residence upwhen from the 70,000th. Suppose they thought it might mean the first of a serious invasion? They can bar us from their Time, so their science is that far advanced beyond ours. Suppose they may further do what seems impossible to us and throw a barrier across the kettleways, cutting us off--"
And now Harlan was on his feet, in full horror, "They have Noys?"
"I don't know. It's speculation. Maybe there is no barrier. Maybe there was something wrong with your ket-"
"There was a barrier!" yelled Harlan. "What other explanation is there? Why didn't you tell me this before."
"I didn't believe it," groaned Twissell. "I still don't. I shouldn't have said a word of this foolish dreaming. My own fears-the question of Cooper-everything- But wait, just a few minutes."
He pointed at the temporometer. The scaler indicated them to be between the 95,000th and 96,000th Centuries.


Twissell's hand on the controls slowed the kettle. The 99,000th was passed. The scaler's motions stopped. The individual Centuries could be read.
99,726-99,727-99,728- "What will we do?" muttered Harlan.
Twissell shook his head in a gesture that spoke eloquently of patience and hope, but perhaps also of helplessness.
99,851-99,852-99,853- Harlan steeled himself for the shock of the barrier and thought desperately: Would preserving Eternity be the only means of finding time to fight back at the creatures of the Hidden Centuries? How else recover Noys? Dash back, back to the 575th and work like fury to- 99,938-99,939-99,940- Harlan held his breath. Twissell slowed the kettle further, let it creep. It responded perfectly to the controls.
99,984-99,985-99,986- "Now, now, now," said Harlan in a whisper, unaware that he had made any sound at all.
99,998-99,999-100,000-100,001-100,002- The numbers mounted and the two men watched them continue to mount in paralytic silence.
Then Twissell cried, "There is no barrier."
And Harlan answered, "There was! There was!" Then, in agony, "Maybe they've got her, and need a barrier no longer."


111,394th!
Harlan leaped from the kettle, and raised his voice. "Noys! Noys!"
The echoes bounced off the walls of the empty Section in hollow syncopation.
Twissell, climbing out more sedately, called after the younger man, "Wait, Harlan--"
That was useless. Harlan, at a run, was hurtling along the corridors toward that portion of the Section they had made a kind of home.
He thought vaguely of the possibility of meeting one of Twissell's "evolved men" and momentarily his skin prickled, but then that was drowned in his urgent need to find Noys.
"Noys!"
And all at once, so quickly that she was in his arms before he was sure he had seen her at all, she was there and with him, and her arms were around him and clutching him and her cheek was against his shoulder and her dark hair was soft against his chin.
"Andrew?" she said, her voice muffled by the pressure of his body. "Where were you? It's been days and I was getting frightened."
Harlan held her out at arm's length, staring at her with a kind of hungry solemnity. "Are you all right?"
"I'm all right. I thought something might have happened to you. I thought--" She broke off, terror springing into her eyes and gasped, "Andrew!"
Harlan whirled.
It was only Twissell, panting.
Noys must have gained confidence from Harlan's expression. She said more quietly, "Do you know him, Andrew? Is it all right?"
Harlan said, "It's all right. This is my superior, Senior Computer Laban Twissell. He knows of you."
"A Senior Computer?" Noys shrank away.
Twissell advanced slowly. "I will help you, my child. I will help you both. The Technician has my promise, if he would only believe it."
"My apologies, Computer," said Harlan stiffly, and not yet entirely repentant.
"Forgiven," said Twissell. He held out his hand, took the girl's reluctant one. "Tell me, girl, has it been well with you here?"
"I've been worried."
"There's been no one here, since Harlan last left you."
"N-no, sir."
"No one at all? Nothing?"
She shook her head. Her dark eyes sought Harlan's. "Why do you ask?"
"Nothing, girl. A foolish nightmare. Come, we will take you back to the 575th."
On the kettle back Andrew Harlan sank, by degrees, into a troubled and deepening silence. He did not look up when the 100,000th was passed in the downwhen direction and Twissell had snorted an obvious sigh of relief as though he had half expected to be trapped on the upwhen side.
He scarcely moved when Noys's hand stole into his, and the manner in which he returned the pressure of her fingers was almost mechanical.


Noys slept in another room and now Twissell's restlessness reached a peak of devouring intensity.
"The advertisement, boy! You have your woman. My part of the agreement is done."
Silently, still abstracted, Harlan turned the pages of the volume on the desk. He found his page.
"It's simple enough," he said, "but it's in English. I'll read it to you and then translate it."
It was a small advertisement in the upper left-hand corner of a page numbered 30. Against an irregular line drawing as background were the unadorned words, in block letters:



ALL THE TALK OF THE MARKET



Underneath, in smaller letters, it said; "Investments News-Letter, P.O. Box 14, Denver, Colorado."
Twissell listened painstakingly to Harlan's translation and was obviously disappointed. He said, "What is the market? What do they mean by that?"
"The stock market," said Harlan impatiently. "A system by which private capital was invested in business. But that's not the point at all. Don't you see the line drawing against which the advertisement is set?"
"Yes. The mushroom cloud of an A-bomb blast. An attention getter. What about it?"
Harlan exploded. "Great Time, Computer, what's wrong with you? Look at the date of the magazine issue."
He pointed to the top heading, just to the left of the page number. It read March 28, 1932.
Harlan said, "That scarcely needs translation. The numbers are about those of Standard Intertemporal and you see it's the 19.32nd Century. Don't you know that at that time no human being who had ever lived had seen the mushroom cloud? No one could possibly reproduce it so accurately, except--"
"Now, wait. It's just a line pattern," said Twissell, trying to retain his equilibrium. "It might resemble the mushroom cloud only coincidentally."
"Might it? Will you look at the wording again?" Harlan's fingers punched out the short lines: "All the-Talk-Of the-Market. The initials spell out ATOM, which is English for atom. Is that coincidence, too? Not a chance.
"Don't you see, Computer, how this advertisement fits the conditions you yourself set up? It caught my eye instantly. Cooper knew it would out of sheer anachronism. At the same time, it has no meaning other than its face value, no meaning at all, for any man of the 19.32nd.
"So it must be Cooper. That's his message. We have the date to the nearest week of a Centicentury. We have his mailing address. It is only necessary to go after him and I'm the only one with enough knowledge of the Primitive to manage that."
"And you'll go?" Twissell's face was ablaze with relief and happiness.
"I'll go-on one condition."
Twissell frowned in a sudden reversal of emotion. "Again conditions?"
"The same condition. I'm not adding new ones. Noys must be safe. She must come with me. I will not leave her behind."
"You still don't trust me? In what way have I failed you? What can there be that still disturbs you?"
"One thing, Computer," said Harlan solemnly. "One thing still. There was a barrier across the 100,000th. Why? That is what still disturbs me."






17. The Closing Circle


It did not stop disturbing him. It was a matter that grew in his mind as the days of preparation sped by. It interposed itself between him and Twissell; then between him and Noys. When the day of departure came, he was only distantly aware of the fact.
It was all he could do to rouse a shadow of interest when Twissell returned from a session with the Council subcommittee. He said, "How did it go?"
Twissell said wearily, "It wasn't exactly the most pleasant conversation I've ever had."
Harlan was almost willing to let it go at that, but he broke his moment's silence with a muttered "I suppose you said nothing about--"
"No, no," was the testy response. "I said nothing about the girl or about your part in the misdirection of Cooper. It was an unfortunate error, a mechanical failure. I took full responsibility."
Harlan's conscience, burdened as it was, could find room for a twinge. He said, "That won't affect you well."
"What can they do? They must wait for the correction to be made before they can touch me. If we fail, we're all beyond help or harm. If we succeed, success itself will probably protect me. And if it doesn't--" The old man shrugged. "I plan to retire from active participation in Eternity's affairs thereafter anyway." But he fumbled his cigarette and disposed of it before it was half burned away.
He sighed. "I would rather not have brought them into this at all, but there would have been no way, otherwise, of using the special kettle for further trips past the downwhen terminus."
Harlan turned away. His thoughts moved around and about the same channels that had been occupied to the increasing exclusion of all else for days. He heard Twissell's further remark dimly, but it was only at its repetition that he said with a start, "Pardon me?"
"I say, is your woman ready, boy? Does she understand what she's to do?"
"She's ready. I've told her everything."
"How did she take it?"
"What?Ö Oh, yes, uh, as I expected her to. She's not afraid."
"It's less than three physiohours now."
"I know."
That was all for the moment, and Harlan was left alone with his thoughts and a sickening realization of what he must do.


With the kettle loading done and the controls adjusted Harlan and Noys appeared in a final change of costume, approximating that of an unurbanized area of the early 20th.
Noyshad modified Harlan's suggestion for her wardrobe, according to some instinctive feeling she claimed women had when it came to matters of clothing and aesthetics. She chose thoughtfully from pictures in the advertisements of the appropriated volumes of the news magazine and had minutely scrutinized items imported from a dozen different Centuries.
Occasionally she would say to Harlan, "What do you think?"
He would shrug. "If it's instinctive knowledge, I'll leave it to you."
"That's a bad sign, Andrew," she said, with a lightness that did not quite ring true. "You're too pliable. What's the matter, anyway? You're just not yourself. You haven't been for days."
"I'm all right," Harlan said in a monotone.
Twissell's first sight of them in the role of natives of the 20th elicited a feeble attempt at jocularity. "Father Time," he said, "what ugly costumes in the Primitive, and yet how it fails to hide your beauty, my-my dear."
Noys smiled warmly at him, and Harlan, standing there impassively silent, was forced to admit that Twissell's rust-choked vein of gallantry had something of truth in it. Noys's clothing encompassed her without accentuating her as clothing should. Her make-up was confined to unimaginative dabs of color on lips and cheeks and an ugly rearrangement of the eyebrow line. Her lovely hair (this had been the worst of it) had been cut ruthlessly. Yet she was beautiful.
Harlan himself was already growing accustomed to his own uncomfortable belt, the tightness of fit under armpits and in the crotch and the mousy lack of color about his rough-textured clothing. Wearing strange costumes to suit a Century was an old story to him.
Twissell was saying, "Now what I really wanted to do was to install hand controls inside the kettle, as we discussed, but there isn't any way, apparently. The engineers simply must have a source of power large enough to handle temporal displacement and that isn't available outside Eternity. Temporal tension while occupying the Primitive is all that can be managed. However, we have a return lever."
He led them into the kettle, picking his way among the piled supplies, and pointed out the obtruding finger of metal that now marred the smooth inner wall of the kettle.
"It amounts to the installation of a simple switch," he said. "Instead of returning automatically to Eternity, the kettle will remain in the Primitive indefinitely. Once the lever is plunged home, however, you will return. There will then be the matter of the second and, I hope, final trip-"
"A second trip?" asked Noys at once.
Harlan said, "I haven't explained that. Look, this first trip is intended merely to fix the time of Cooper's arrival precisely. We don't know how long a Time-lapse exists between his arrival and the placing of the advertisement. We'll reach him by the post-office box, and learn, if possible, the exact minute of his arrival, or as close as we can, anyway. We can then return to that moment plus fifteen minutes to allow for the kettle to have left Cooper-"
Twissell interposed, "Couldn't have the kettle in the same place at the same time in two different physiotimes, you know," and tried to smile.
Noys seemed to absorb it. "I see," she said, not too definitely.
Twissell said to Noys, "Picking up Cooper at the time of his arrival will reverse all micro-changes. The A-bomb advertisement will disappear again and Cooper will know only that the kettle, having disappeared as we told him it would, had unexpectedly appeared again. He will not know that he was in the wrong Century and he will not be told. We will tell him that there was some vital instruction we had forgotten to give him (we'll have to manufacture some) and we can only hope that he will regard the matter as so unimportant that he won't mention being sent back twice when he writes his memoir."
Noys lifted her plucked eyebrows. "It's very complicated."
"Yes. Unfortunately." He rubbed his hands together and looked at the others as though nursing an inner doubt. Then he straightened, produced a fresh cigarette, and even managed a certain jauntiness as he said, "And now, boy, good luck." Twissell touched hands briefly with Harlan, nodded to Noys, and stepped out of the kettle.
"Are we leaving now?" asked Noys of Harlan when they were alone.
"In a few minutes," said Harlan.
He glanced sideways at Noys. She was looking up at him, smiling, unfrightened. Momentarily his own spirits responded to that. But that was emotion, not reason, he counciled himself; instinct, not thought. He looked away.


The trip was nothing, or almost nothing; no different from an ordinary kettle ride. Midway there was a kind of internal jar that might have been the downwhen terminus and might have been purely psychosomatic. It was barely noticeable.
And then they were in the Primitive and they stepped into a craggy, lonely world brightened by the splendor of an afternoon sun. There was a soft wind with a chilly edge to it and, most of all, silence.
The bare rocks were tumbled and mighty, colored into dull rainbows by compounds of iron, copper, and chromium. The grandeur of the manless and all but lifeless surroundings dwarfed and shriveled Harlan. Eternity, which did not belong to the world of matter, had no sun and none but imported air. His memories of his own homewhen were dim. His Observations in the various Centuries had dealt with men and their cities. He had never experienced this.
Noys touched his elbow.
"Andrew! I'm cold."
He turned to her with a start.
She said, "Hadn't we better set up the Radiant?"
He said, "Yes. In Cooper's cavern."
"Do you know where it is?"
"It's right here," he said shortly.
He had no doubt of that. The memoir had located it and first Cooper, now he, had been pin-pointed back to it.
He had not doubted precision pin-pointing in Time-travel since his Cubhood days. He remembered himself then, facing Educator Yarrow seriously, saying, "But Earth moves about the Sun, and the Sun moves about the Galactic Center and the Galaxy moves too. If you started from some point on Earth, and move downwhen a hundred years, you'll be in empty space, because it will take a hundred years for Earth to reach that point." (Those were the days when he still referred to a Century as a "hundred years.")
And Educator Yarrow had snapped back, "You don't separate Time from space. Moving through Time, you share Earth's motions. Or do you believe that a bird flying through the air whiffs out into space because the Earth is hurrying around the Sun at eighteen miles a second and vanishes from under the creature?"
Arguing from analogy is risky, but Harlan obtained more rigorous proof in later days and, now, after a scarcely precedented trip into the Primitive, he could turn confidently and feel no surprise at finding the opening precisely where he had been told it would be.
He moved the camouflage of loose rubble and rock to one side and entered.
He probed the darkness within, using the white beam of his flash almost like a scalpel. He scoured the walls, ceiling, floor, every inch.
Noys, remaining close behind him, whispered, "What are you looking for?"
He said, "Something. Anything,"
He found his something, anything, at the very rear of the cave in the shape of a flattish stone covering greenish sheets like a paperweight.
Harlan threw the stone aside and flipped the sheets past one thumb.
"What are they?" asked Noys.
"Bank notes. Medium of exchange. Money."
"Did you know they were there?"
"I knew nothing. I just hoped."
It was only a matter of using Twissell's reverse logic, of calculating cause from effect. Eternity existed, so Cooper must be making correct decisions too. In assuming the advertisement would pull Harlan into the correct Time, the cave was an obvious additional means of communication.
Yet this was almost better than he had dared hope. More than once during the preparations for his trip into the Primitive, Harlan had thought that making his way into a town with nothing but bullion in his possession would result in suspicion and delay.
Cooper had managed, to be sure, but Cooper had had time. Harlan hefted the sheaf of bills. And he must have used time to accumulate this much. He had done well, the youngster, marvelously well.
And the circle was closing!
The supplies had been moved into the cave, in the increasingly ruddy glow of the westering sun. The kettle had been covered by a diffuse reflecting film which would hide it from any but the closest of prying eyes, and Harlan had a blaster to take care of those, if need be. The Radiant was set up in the cave and the flash was wedged into a crevice, so that they had heat and light.
Outside it was a chill March night.
Noys stared thoughtfully into the smooth paraboloid interior of the Radiant as it slowly rotated. She said, "Andrew, what are your plans?"
"Tomorrow morning," he said, "I'll leave for the nearest town. I know where it is-or should be." (He changed it back to "is" in his mind. There would be no trouble. Twissell's logic again.)
"I'll come with you, won't I?"
He shook his head. "You can't speak the language, for one thing, and the trip will be difficult enough for one to negotiate."
Noys looked strangely archaic in her short hair and the sudden anger in her eyes made Harlan look away uneasily.
She said, "I'm no fool, Andrew. You scarcely speak to me. You don't look at me. What is it? Is your homewhen morality taking hold? Do you feel you have betrayed Eternity and are you blaming me for that? Do you feel I have corrupted you? What is it?"
He said, "You don't know what I feel."
She said, "Then describe it. You might as well. You'll never have a chance as good as this one. Do you feel love? For me? You couldn't or you wouldn't be using me as a scapegoat. Why did you bring me here? Tell me. Why not have left me in Eternity since you have no use for me here and since it seems you can hardly bear the sight of me?"
Harlan muttered, "There's danger."
"Oh, come now."
"It's more than danger. It's a nightmare. Computer Twissell's nightmare," said Harlan. "It was during our last panicky flash upwhen into the Hidden Centuries that he told me of thoughts he had had concerning those Centuries. He speculated on the possibility of evolved varieties of man, new species, supermen perhaps, hiding in the far upwhen, cutting themselves off from our interference, plotting to end our tamperings with Reality. He thought it was they who built the barrier across the 100,000th. Then we found you, and Computer Twissell abandoned his nightmare. He decided there had never been a barrier. He returned to the more immediate problem of salvaging Eternity.
"But I, you see, had been infected by his nightmare. I had experienced the barrier, so I knew it existed. No Eternal had built it, for Twissell said such a thing was theoretically impossible. Maybe Eternity's theories didn't go far enough. The barrier was there. Someone had built it. Or something.
"Of course," he went on thoughtfully, "Twissell was wrong in some ways. He felt that man must evolve, but that's not so. Paleontology is not one of the sciences that interest Eternals, but it interested the late Primitives, so I picked up a bit of it myself. I know this much: species evolve only to meet the pressures of new environments. In a stable environment, a species may remain unchanged for millions of Centuries. Primitive man evolved rapidly because his environment was a harsh and changing one. Once, however, mankind learned to create his own environment, he created a pleasant and stable one, so he just naturally stopped evolving."
"I don't know what you're talking about," said Noys, sounding not the least mollified, "and you're not saying anything about us, which is what I want to talk about."
Harlan managed to remain outwardly unmoved. He said, "Now why the barrier at the 100,000th? What purpose did it serve? You weren't harmed. What other meaning could it have? I asked myself: What happened because of its presence that would not have happened had it been absent?"
He paused, looking at his clumsy and heavy boots of natural leather. It occurred to him that he could add to his comfort by removing them for the night, but not now, not nowÖ
He said, "There was only one answer to that question. The existence of that barrier sent me raving back downwhen to get a neuronic whip, to assault Finge. It fired me to the thought of risking Eternity to get you back and smashing Eternity when I thought I had failed. Do you see?"
Noys stared at him with a mixture of horror and disbelief. "Do you mean the people in the upwhen wanted you to do all that? They planned it?"
"Yes. Don't look at me like that. Yes! And don't you see how it makes everything different? As long as I acted on my own, for reasons of my own, I'll take all the consequences, material and spiritual. But to be fooled into it, to be tricked into it, by people handling and manipulating my emotions as though I were a Computaplex on which it was only necessary to insert the properly perforated foils-"
Harlan realized suddenly that he was shouting and stopped abruptly. He let a few moments pass, then said, "That is impossible to take. I've got to undo what I was marionetted into doing. And when I undo it, I will be able to rest again."
And he would-perhaps. He could feel the coming of an impersonal triumph, dissociated from the personal tragedy which lay behind and ahead. The circle was closing!
Noys's hand reached out uncertainly as though to take his own rigid, unyielding one.
Harlan drew away, avoided her sympathy. He said, "It had all been arranged. My meeting with you. Everything. My emotional make-up had been analyzed. Obviously. Action and response. Push this button and the man will do that. Push that button and he will do this."
Harlan was speaking with difficulty, out of the depths of shame. He shook his head, trying to shake the horror of it away as a dog would water, then went on. "One thing I didn't understand at first. How did I come to guess that Cooper was to be sent back into the Primitive? It was a most unlikely thing to guess. I had no basis. Twissell didn't understand it. More than once he wondered how I could have done it with so little understanding of mathematics.
"Yet I had. The first time was that-that night. You were asleep, but I wasn't. I had the feeling then that there was something I must remember; some remark, some thought, something that I had caught sight of in the excitement and exhilaration of the evening. When I thought long, the whole significance of Cooper sprang into my mind, and along with it the thought entered my mind that I was in a position to destroy Eternity. Later I checked through histories of mathematics, but it was unnecessary really. I already knew. I was certain of it. How? How?"
Noys stared at him intently. She didn't try to touch him now. "Do you mean the men of the Hidden Centuries arranged that, too? They put it all in your mind, then maneuvered you properly?"
"Yes. Yes. Nor are they done. There is still work for them to do. The circle may be closing, but it is not yet closed."
"How can they do anything now? They're not here with us."
"No?" He said the word in so hollow a voice that Noys paled.
"Invisible superthings?" she whispered.
"Not superthings. Not invisible. I told you man would not evolve while he controlled his own environment. The people of the Hidden Centuries are Homo sapiens. Ordinary people."
"Then they're certainly not here."
Harlan said sadly, "You're here, Noys."
"Yes. And you. And no one else."
"You and I," agreed Harlan. "No one else. A woman of the Hidden Centuries and IÖ Don't act any more, Noys. Please."
She stared at him with horror. "What are you saying, Andrew?"
"What I must say. What were you saying that evening, when you gave me the peppermint drink? You were talking to me. Your soft voice-soft wordsÖ I heard nothing, not consciously, but I remember your delicate voice whispering. About what? The downwhen journey of Cooper; the Samson-smash of Eternity. Am I right?"
Noys said, "I don't even know what Samson-smash means."
"You can guess very accurately, Noys. Tell me, when did you enter the 482nd? Whom did you replace? Or did you just-squeeze in. I had your Life-Plot worked out by an expert in the 2456th. In the new Reality, you had no existence at all. No analogue. Strange for such a small Change, but not impossible. And then the Life-Plotter said one thing which I heard with my ears but not with my mind. Strange that I should remember it. Perhaps even then, something clanged in my mind, but I was too full of-you to listen. He said: '_with the combination of factors you handed me, I don't quite see how she fit in the old Reality_.'
"He was right. You didn't fit in. You were an invader from the far upwhen, manipulating me and Finge, too, to suit yourself."
Noys said urgently, "Andrew--"
"It all fit in, if I had the eyes to look. A book-film in your house entitled _Social and Economic History_. It surprised me when first I saw it. You needed it, didn't you, to teach you how best to be a woman of the Century. Another item. Our first trip into the Hidden Centuries, remember? _You_ stopped the kettle at the 111,394th. You stopped it with finesse, without fumbling. Where did you learn to control a kettle? If you were what you seemed to be, that would have been your first trip in a kettle. Why the 111,394th, anyway? Was it your homewhen?"
She said softly, "Why did you bring me to the Primitive, Andrew?"
He shouted suddenly, "To protect Eternity. I could not tell what damage you might do there. Here, you are helpless, because I know you. Admit that all I say is true! Admit it!"
He rose in a paroxysm of wrath, arm upraised. She did not flinch. She was utterly calm. She might have been modeled out of warm, beautiful wax. Harlan did not complete his motion.
He said, "Admit it!"
She said, "Are you so uncertain, after all your deductions? What will it matter to you whether I admit it or not."
Harlan felt the wildness mount. "Admit it, anyway, so that I need feel no pain at all. None at all."
"Pain?"
"Because I have a blaster, Noys, and it is my intention to kill you."






18. The Beginning of Infinity


There was a crawling uncertainty inside Harlan, an irresolution that was consuming him. He had the blaster in his hand. It was aimed at Noys.
But why did she say nothing? Why did she persist in this impassive attitude?
How could he kill her?
How could he not kill her?
He said hoarsely, "Well?"
She moved, but it was only to clasp her hands loosely in her lap, to look more relaxed, more aloof. When she spoke her voice seemed scarcely that of a human being. Facing the muzzle of a blaster, it yet gained assurance and took on an almost mystic quality of impersonal strength.
She said, "You cannot wish to kill me only in order to protect Eternity. If that were your desire, you could stun me, tie me firmly, pin me within this cave and then take to your travels in the dawn. Or you might have asked Computer Twissell to keep me in solitary confinement during your absence in the Primitive. Or you might take me with you at dawn, lose me in the wastes. If it is only killing that will satisfy you, it is only because you think that I have betrayed you, that I have tricked you into love first in order that I might trick you into treason later. This is murder out of wounded pride and not at all the just retribution you tell yourself it is."
Harlan squirmed. "Are you from the Hidden Centuries? Tell me."
Noys said, "I am. Will you now blast?"
Harlan's finger trembled on the blaster's contact point. Yet he hesitated. Something irrational within him could still plead her case and point up the remnants of his own futile love and longing. Was she desperate at his rejection of her? Was she deliberately courting death by lying? Was she indulging in foolish heroics born of despair at his doubts of her?
No!_
The book-films of the sickly-sweet literary traditions of the 289th might have it so, but not a girl like Noys. She was not one to meet her death at the hands of a false lover with the joyful masochism of a broken, bleeding lily.
Then was she scornfully denying his ability to kill her for any reason whatever? Was she confidently relying on the attraction she knew she had for him even now, certain that it would immobilize him, freeze him in weakness and shame.
That hit too closely. His finger clamped a bit harder on the contact.
Noys spoke again. "You're waiting. Does that mean you expect me to enter a brief for the defense?"
"What defense?" Harlan tried to make that scornful, yet he welcomed the diversion. It could postpone the moment when he must look down upon her blasted body, upon whatever remnants of bloody flesh might remain, and know that what had been done to his beautiful Noys had been done by his own hand.
He found excuses for his delay. He thought feverishly: Let her talk. Let her tell what she can about the Hidden Centuries. So much better protection for Eternity.
It put a front of firm policy on his action and for the moment he could look at her with as calm a face, almost, as she looked at him.
Noys might have read his mind. She said, "Do you want to know about the Hidden Centuries? If that will be a defense, it is easily done. Would you like to know, for instance, why Earth is empty of mankind after the 150,000th? Would you be interested?"
Harlan wasn't going to plead for knowledge, nor was he going to buy knowledge. He had the blaster. He was very intent on no show of weakness.
He said, "Talk!" and flushed at the little smile which was her first response to his exclamation.
She said, "At a moment in physiotime before Eternity had reached very far upwhen, before it had reached even the 10,000th, we of our Century-and you're right, it was the 111,394th-learned of Eternity's existence. We, toe, had Time-travel, you see, but it was based on a completely different set of postulates than yours, and we preferred to view Time, rather than shifting mass. Furthermore, we dealt with our past only, our downwhen.
"We discovered Eternity indirectly. First, we developed the calculus of Realities and tested our own Reality through it. We were amazed to find we lived in a Reality of rather low probability. It was a serious question. Why such an improbable Reality?Ö You seem abstracted, Andrew! Are you interested at all?"
Harlan heard her say his name with all the intimate tenderness she had used in weeks past. It should grate on him now, anger him with its cynical faithlessness. And yet it didn't.
He said desperately, "Go on and get it over with, woman."
He tried to balance the warmth of her "Andrew" with the chill anger of his "woman" and yet she only smiled again, pallidly.
She said, "We searched back through time and came across the growing Eternity. It seemed obvious to us almost at once that there had been at one point in physiotime (a conception we have also, but under another name) another Reality. The other Reality, the one of maximum probability we call the Basic State. The Basic State had encompassed us once, or had encompassed our analogues, at least. At the time we could not say what the nature of the Basic State was. We could not possibly know.
"We did know, however, that some Change initiated by Eternity in the far downwhen had managed, through the workings of statistical chance, to alter the Basic State all the way up to our Century and beyond. We set about determining the nature of the Basic State, intending to undo the evil, if evil it was. First we set up the quarantined area you call the Hidden Centuries, isolating the Eternals on the downwhen side of the 70,000th. This armor of isolation would affect us from all but a vanishingly small percentage of the Changes being made. It wasn't absolute security but it gave us time.
"We next did something our culture and ethics did not ordinarily allow us to do. We investigated our own future, our upwhen. We learned the destiny of man in the Reality that actually existed in order that we might compare it eventually with Basic State. Somewhere past the 125,000th, mankind solved the secret of the interstellar drive. They learned how to manage the Jump through hyperspace. Finally, mankind could reach the stars."
Harlan was listening in growing absorption to her measured words. How much truth was there in all this? How much was a calculated attempt to deceive him? He tried to break the spell by speaking, by breaking the smooth flow of her sentences. He said:
"And once they could reach the stars, they did so and left the Earth. Some of us have guessed that."
"Then some of you have guessed wrong. Man tried to leave Earth. Unfortunately, however, we are not alone in the Galaxy. There are other stars with other planets, you know. There are even other intelligences. None, in this Galaxy at least, are as ancient as mankind, but in the 125,000 Centuries man remained on Earth, younger minds caught up and passed us, developed the interstellar drive, and colonized the Galaxy.
"When we moved out into space, the signs were up. _Occupied! No Trespassing! Clear Out!_ Mankind drew back its exploratory feelers, remained at home. But now he knew Earth for what it was: a prison surrounded by an infinity of freedomÖ And mankind died out!"
Harlan said, "Just died out. Nonsense."
"They didn't just die out. It took thousands of Centuries. There were ups and downs but, on the whole, there was a loss of purpose, a sense of futility, a feeling of hopelessness that could not be overcome. Eventually there was one last decline of the birth rate and finally, extinction. Your Eternity did that."
Harlan could defend Eternity now, the more intensely and extravagantly for having so shortly before attacked it so keenly. He said, "Let us at the Hidden Centuries and we will correct that. We have not failed yet to achieve the greatest good in those Centuries we could reach."
"The greatest good?" asked Noys in a detached tone that seemed to make a mockery of the phrase. "What is that? Your machines tell you. Your Computaplexes. But who adjusts the machines and tells them what to weigh in the balance? The machines do not solve problems with greater insight than men do, only faster. Only faster! Then what is it the Eternals consider good? I'll tell you. Safety and security. Moderation. Nothing in excess. No risks without overwhelming certainty of an adequate return."
Harlan swallowed. With sudden force he remembered Twissell's words in the kettle while talking about the evolved men of the Hidden Centuries. He said: "_We bred out the unusual_."
And wasn't it so?
"Well," said Noys, "you seem to be thinking. Think of this, then. In the Reality that now exists, why is it that man is continually attempting space-travel and continually failing? Surely each space-travel era must know of previous failures. Why try again, then?"
Harlan said, "I haven't studied the matter." But he thought uneasily of the colonies on Mars, established again and again, always failing. He thought of the odd attraction that space-flight always had, even for Eternals. He could hear Sociologist Kantor Voy of the 2456th, sighing at the loss of electro-gravitic space-flight in one Century, and saying longingly: "_It had been very beautiful_." And Life-Plotter Neron Feruque, who had sworn bitterly at its passing and had launched into a fit of railing at Eternity's handling of anti-cancer serums to case his spirit.
Was there such a thing as an instinctive yearning on the part of intelligent beings to expand outward, to reach the stars, to leave the prison of gravity behind? Was it that which forced man to develop interplanetary travel dozens of times, forced him to travel over and over again to the dead worlds of a solar system in which only Earth was livable? Was it the eventual failure, the knowledge that one must return to the home prison, that brought about the maladjustments that Eternity was forever fighting. Harlan thought of the drug addiction in those same futile Centuries of the electro-gravitics.
Noys said, "In ironing out the disasters of Reality, Eternity rules out the triumphs as well. It is in meeting the great tests that mankind can most successfully rise to great heights. Out of danger and restless insecurity comes the force that pushes mankind to newer and loftier conquests. Can you understand that? Can you understand that in averting the pitfalls and miseries that beset man, Eternity prevents men from finding their own bitter and better solutions, the real solutions that come from conquering difficulty, not avoiding it."
Harlan began woodenly, "The greatest good of the greatest number--"
Noys cut in. "Suppose Eternity had never been established?"
"Well?"
"I'll tell you what would have happened. The energies that went into temporal engineering would have gone into nucleonics instead. Eternity would not have come but the interstellar drive would. Man would have reached the stars more than a hundred thousand Centuries before he did in this current Reality. The stars would then have been untenanted and mankind would have established itself throughout the Galaxy. We would have been first."
"And what would have been gained?" asked Harlan doggedly. "Would we be happier?"
"Whom do you mean by 'we'? Man would not be a world but a million worlds, a billion worlds. We would have the infinite in our grasp. Each world would have its own stretch of the Centuries, each its own values, a chance to seek happiness after ways of its own in an environment of its own. There are many happinesses, many goods, infinite varietyÖ That is the Basic State of mankind."
"You're guessing," said Harlan, and he was angry at himself for feeling attraction for the picture she had conjured. "How can you tell what would have happened?"
Noys said, "You smile at the ignorance of the Timers who know only one Reality. We smile at the ignorance of the Eternals who think there are many Realities but that only one exists at a time."
"What does that gibberish mean?"
"We don't calculate alternate Realities. We view them. We see them in their state of non-Reality."
"A kind of ghostly never-never land where the might-have-beens play with the ifs."
"Without the sarcasm, yes."
"And how do you do that?"
Noys paused, then said, "How can I explain that, Andrew? I have been educated to know certain things without really understanding all about them, just as you have. Can you explain the workings of a Computaplex? Yet you know it exists and works."
Harlan flushed. "Well, then?"
Noys said, "We learned to view Realities and we found Basic State to be as I have described. We found, too, the Change that had destroyed Basic State. It was not any Change that Eternity had initiated; it was the establishment of Eternity itself-the mere fact of its existence. Any system like Eternity, which allows men to choose their own future, will end by choosing safety and mediocrity, and in such a Reality the stars are out of reach. The mere existence of Eternity at once wiped out the Galactic Empire. To restore it, Eternity must be done away with.
"The number of Realities is infinite. The number of any subclass of Realities is also infinite. For instance, the number of Realities containing Eternity is infinite; the number in which Eternity does not exist is infinite; the number in which Eternity does exist but is abolished is also infinite. But my people chose from among the infinite a group that involved me.
"I had nothing to do with that. They educated me for my job as Twissell and yourself educated Cooper for his job. But the number of Realities in which I was the agent in destroying Eternity was also infinite. I was offered a choice among five Realities that seemed least complex. I chose this one, the one involving you, the only Reality system involving you."
Harlan said, "Why did you choose it?"
Noys looked away. "Because I loved you, you see. I loved you long before I met you."
Harlan was shaken. She said it with such depths of sincerity. He thought, sickly: She's an actress- He said, "That's rather ridiculous."
"Is it? I studied the Realities at my disposal. I studied the Reality in which I went back to the 482nd, met first Finge, then you. The one in which you came to me and loved me, in which you took me into Eternity and the far upwhen of my own Century, in which you misdirected Cooper, and in which you and I, together, returned to the Primitive. We lived in the Primitive for the rest of our days. I saw our lives together and they were happy and I loved you. So it's not ridiculous at all. I chose this alternative so that our love might be true."
Harlan said, "All this is false. It's false. How can you expect me to believe you?" He stopped, then said suddenly, "Wait! You say you knew all this in advance? All that would happen?"
"Yes."
"Then you're obviously lying. You would have known that I would have you here at blaster point. You would have known you would fail. What is your answer to that?"
She sighed lightly, "I told you there are an infinite number of any subclass of Realities. No matter how finely we focus on a given Reality it always represents an infinite number of very similar Realities. There are fuzzy spots. The finer we focus, the less fuzzy, but perfect sharpness cannot be obtained. The less fuzzy, the lower the probability of chance variation spoiling the result, but the probability is never absolutely zero. One fuzzy spot spoiled things."
"Which?"
"You were to have come back to the far upwhen after the barrier at the 100,000th had been lowered and you did. But you were to have come back alone. It is for that reason that I was momentarily so startled at seeing Computer TwisseIl with you."
Again Harlan was troubled. How she made things fit in!
Noys said, "I would have been even more startled, had I realized the significance of that alteration in full. Had you come alone, you would have brought me back to the Primitive as you did. Then, for love of humanity, for love of me, you would have left Cooper untouched. Your circle would have been broken, Eternity ended, our life together here safe.
"But you came with Twissell, a chance variation. While coming, he talked to you of his thoughts about the Hidden Centuries and started you on a train of deductions that ended with your doubting my good faith. It ended with a blaster between usÖ And now, Andrew, that's the story. You may blast me. There is nothing to stop you."
Harlan's hand ached from its spastic grasp on the blaster. He shifted it dizzily to the other hand. Was there no flaw in her story? Where was the resolution he was to have gained from knowing certainly that she was a creature of the Hidden Centuries. He was more than ever tearing at himself in conflict and dawn was approaching.
He said, "Why two efforts to end Eternity? Why couldn't Eternity have ended once and for all when I sent Cooper back to the 20th?" Things would have ended then and there would not have been this agony of uncertainty."
"Because," said Noys, "ending this Eternity is not enough. We must reduce the probability of establishing any form of Eternity to as near zero as we can manage. So there is one thing we must do here in the Primitive. A small Change, a little thing. You know what a Minimum Necessary Change is like. It is only a letter to a peninsula called Italy here in the 20th. It is now the 19.32nd. In a few Centicenturies, provided I send the letter, a man of Italy will begin experimenting with the neutronic bombardment of uranium."
Harlan found himself horrified. "You will alter Primitive history?"
"Yes. It is our intention. In the new Reality, the final Reality, the first nuclear explosion will take place not in the 30th Century but in the 19.45th."
"But do you know the danger? Can you possibly estimate the danger?"
"We know the danger. We have viewed the sheaf of resulting Realities. There is a probability, not a certainty, of course, that Earth will end with a largely radioactive crust, but before that--"
"You mean there can be compensation for that?"
"A Galactic Empire. An actual intensification of the Basic State."
"Yet you accuse the Eternals of interfering--"
"We accuse them of interfering many times to keep mankind safely at home and in prison. We interfere once, once, to turn him prematurely to nucleonics so that he might never, never, establish an Eternity."
"No," said Harlan desperately. "There must be an Eternity."
"If you choose. It is yours to choose. If you wish to have psychopaths dictate the future of man-"
"Psychopaths!" exploded Harlan.
"Aren't they? You know them. Think!"
Harlan stared at her in outraged horror, yet he could not help thinking. He thought of Cubs learning the truth about Reality and Cub Latourette trying to kill himself as a result. Latourette had survived to become an Eternal, with what scars on his personality none could say, yet helping to decide on alternate Realities.
He thought of the caste system in Eternity, of the abnormal life that turned guilt feelings into anger and hatred against Technicians. He thought of Computers, struggling against themselves, of Finge intriguing against Twissell and Twissell spying on Finge. He thought of Sennor, fighting his bald head by fighting all the Eternals.
He thought of himself.
Then he thought of Twissell, the great Twissell, also breaking the laws of Eternity.
It was as though he had always known Eternity to be all this. Why else should he have been so willing to destroy it? Yet he had never admitted it to himself fully; he had never looked it clearly in the face, until, suddenly, now.
And he saw Eternity with great clarity as a sink of deepening psychoses, a writhing pit of abnormal motivation, a mass of desperate lives torn brutally out of context.
He looked blankly at Noys.
She said softly, "Do you see? Come to the mouth of the cave with me, Andrew?"
He followed her, hypnotized, appalled at the completeness with which he had gained a new viewpoint. His blaster fell away from the line connecting it and Noys's heart for the first time.


The pale streakings of dawn grayed the sky, and the bulking kettle just outside the cave was an oppressive shadow against the pallor. Its outlines were dulled and blurred by the film thrown over it.
Noys said, "This is Earth. Not the eternal and only home of mankind, but only a starting point of an infinite adventure. All you need do is make the decision. It is yours to make. You and I and the contents of this cave will be protected by a physiotime field against the Change. Cooper will disappear along with his advertisement; Eternity will go and the Reality of my Century, but we will remain to have children and grandchildren, and mankind will remain to reach the stars."
He turned to look at her, and she was smiling at him. It was Noys as she had been, and his own heart beating as it had used to.
He wasn't even aware that he had made his decision until the grayness suddenly invaded all the sky as the hulk of the kettle disappeared from against it.
With that disappearance, he knew, even as Noys moved slowly into his arms, came the end, the final end of Eternity.
ñAnd the beginning of Infinity.




Isaac Asimov


Asimovís Guide To Shakespear





whatISAAC ASIMOV




Volume One


The Greek, Roman, and Italian Plays







Introduction


Those of us who speak English as our native tongue can count a number of blessings. It is a widespread language that is understood by more people in more parts of the world than any other [Chinese has more speakers than English, but it is understood on a large scale only in eastern and southeastern Asia] and it is therefore the language that is most nearly an open door to all peoples. 
Its enormous vocabulary and its relatively simple grammar give it un-equaled richness and flexibility and more than make up for its backward spelling. Its hospitality to idiomatic phrases and to foreign words gives it a colorful and dramatic quality that is without peer. 
But most of all, we who speak English can read, in the original, the writings of William Shakespeare, a man who is certainly the supreme writer through all the history of English literature and who, in the opinion of many, is the greatest writer who ever lived-in any language. 
Indeed, so important are Shakespeare's works that only the Bible can compare with them in their influence upon our language and thought. Shakespeare has said so many things so supremely well that we are forever finding ourselves thinking in his terms. (There is the story of the woman who read Hamlet for the first tune and said, "I don't see why people admire that play so. It is nothing but a bunch of quotations strung together.") 
I have a feeling that Shakespeare has even acted as a brake on the development of English. Before his time, English was developing so rapidly that the works of Geoffrey Chaucer, written shortly before 1400, had become unreadably archaic, two centuries later, to the Englishmen of Shakespeare's time. Yet now, after three and a half centuries, Shakespeare's plays can be read quite easily and with only an occasional archaic word or phrase requiring translation. It is almost as though the English language dare not change so much as to render Shakespeare incomprehensible. That would be an unacceptable price to pay for change. 
In this respect, Shakespeare is even more important than the Bible. The King James version of the Bible is, of course, only a translation, although a supremely great one. If it becomes archaic there is nothing to prevent newer translations into more modern English. Indeed, such newer translations exist. 
How, though, can anyone ever dream of "translating" Shakespeare into "modern English"? That would do, perhaps, if one were merely interested in the contents of Shakespeare. (It is, by analogy, in the contents of the Bible that we are interested, not in its exact syllables.) 
But who can bear to have nothing more than the contents of Shakespeare's plays? What translation, even merely from one form of English into another form, could possibly reproduce the exact music and thunder of Shakespeare's syllables, and without that- 
Yet in one respect Shakespeare recedes from us no matter how faithfully we follow the very syllables he uses. He wrote for all time, yes (whether he knew it or not), but he also wrote for a specific audience, that of Elizabethan Englishmen and -women. He gave its less educated individuals the horseplay and slapstick they enjoyed, and he gave its more educated individuals a wealth of allusion. 
He assumed the educated portion of the audience were thoroughly grounded in Greek and Roman mythology and history, since that was part (and, indeed, almost the whole) of the classical education of the upper classes of the time. He assumed, also, that they were well acquainted with England's own history and with the geography of sixteenth-century Europe. 
Modern Americans, however, are for the most part only vaguely aware of Greek mythology or Roman history. If anything, they are even less aware of those parts of English history with which Shakespeare deals. 
This is not to say that one cannot enjoy Shakespeare without knowing the historical, legendary, or mythological background to the events in his plays. There is still the great poetry and the deathless swing of his writing. -And yet, if we did know a little more of what that writing was about, would not the plays take on new dimensions and lend us still greater enjoyment? 
This is what it is in my mind to do in this book. 
It is not my intention to discuss the literary values of the plays, or to analyze them from a theatrical, philosophical, or psychological point of view. Others have done this far beyond any poor capacity I might have in that direction. 
What I can do, however, is to go over each of the thirty-eight plays and two narrative poems written by Shakespeare in his quarter century of literary life, and explain, as I go along, the historical, legendary, and mythological background. 
In the process, I will, in some places, spend many pages on a single short speech which requires a great deal of background knowledge for its proper total appreciation. I may, in other places, skip quickly through whole acts which require nothing more than an understanding of a few archaic words to be crystal clear. (On the whole, I shall make no attempt to translate simple archaisms. This is done, quite adequately, in any briefly annotated edition of Shakespeare.) 
In dealing with the plays, I will quote whatever passage inspires an explanation, but I will quote very little else. If the reader is reasonably familiar with a particular play, he will be able to read through the chapter devoted to it without needing to refer to the play itself. If he is not familiar with a particular play, it would probably help to keep it at hand for possible reference. 
One matter over which I hesitated for a considerable length of time was the question of the order of presentation of the plays. The traditional order, as found in most editions of Shakespeare's collected works, groups the comedies first, then the histories, then the tragedies. This traditional order is very far removed from the order in which the plays were written. Thus, The Tempest, which is the first play in the ordinary editions, is the last play that Shakespeare wrote without collaboration. The Two Gentlemen of Verona, which is next, is one of the earliest. 
It is possible to prepare an edition in which the plays are presented roughly in the order of their writing, something of value to those who study Shakespeare's developing techniques and ideas. This order can only be rough because it is not always certain in exactly which year a particular play was written. Worse yet, placing the plays in the chronological order of writing disrupts the histories and places them out of order as far as the historical events they deal with are concerned. 
Since I am chiefly interested in this book in the historical, legendary, and mythological background of the events described in the various plays, I have decided to place the plays in the chronological order of those historical events as far as possible. 
To begin with, I divide the plays into four broad groups: Greek, Roman, Italian, and English. 
The Greek plays will include those that have their basis in Greek legend, as for instance, Troilus and Cressida; or in Greek history (however faintly), as Timon of Athens. It will also, however, include pure romances, with no claim whatever to any historical value, except that the background is arbitrarily set in a time we recognize as Greek-as The Winter's Tale. 
The Roman plays include those that are based on actual history, as Julius Caesar, or on utterly non-historical, but Rome-based, inventiveness, as Titus Andronicus. (As it happens, even historical fiction such as The Winter's Tale and Titus Andronicus can be faintly related to actual historical events. No fiction writer is an island and no matter how he tries to draw on his imagination alone, the real world will intrude.) 
The Italian plays are those set in a Renaissance Italian setting (or in nearby places such as France, Austria, or Illyria) which cannot be pinned down to any specific period of time. I will present the plays in this section in the order in which Shakespeare (as best we can tell) wrote them. 
The English plays include not only the sober historical plays such as Richard II or Henry V, but also those which deal with the legendary period of English history before the Norman conquest or even, in the case of King Lear and Cymbeline, before the Roman conquest. 
There is some overlapping. The Greek plays set latest in time are later than the earliest Roman plays; and the latest Roman plays are later than the earliest English plays. The radical difference in scene, however, makes it convenient to ignore this slight chronological inconsistency. With that out of the way, the order of plays and narrative poems in this volume will carry us through some twenty-eight centuries of history, from the time of legendary Greece before the Trojan War, to Shakespeare's own time. 
To make a reasonably even division of the book into two volumes, the Greek, Roman, and Italian plays-in that order-will be grouped into Volume One. This will leave the English plays, to which I have devoted a little more than half the book, to form Volume Two. 
In preparing this book, I have made as much use as I could of all sorts of general reference books: encyclopedias, atlases, mythologies, biographical dictionaries, histories-whatever came to hand. 
To one set of books, however, I owe an especial debt. These are the many volumes of "The Signet Classic Shakespeare" (General Editor, Sylvan Barnet, published by New American Library, New York). It was, as a matter of fact, while reading my pleasurable way through these volumes that the notion of Asimov's Guide to Shakespeare occurred to me. 








Part I. Greek






1. Venus And Adonis


Of all Shakespeare's writings, Venus and Adonis is the most straightforwardly mythological and traces farthest backward (if only dimly so) in history. For that reason, I will begin with it. 


Earl of Southampton




"Venus and Adonis" bears a dedication: 


To the Right Honourable Henry Wriothesley, Earl of South ampton, and Baron of Tichfield.




-Dedication


Southampton was a well-educated youth of considerable wealth, who was presented at the court of Queen Elizabeth I in 1590, while he was still a boy in his teens. He quickly became a generous patron of poets, Shakespeare among them. 
It is suggested that one of Shakespeare's early plays, Love's Labor's Lost (see page I-421) was written for a premiere performance at Southampton's house before an assemblage of his friends and guests. If so, the play must have pleased Southampton tremendously; his patronage to Shakespeare extended (so at least one report goes) to the gift of a thousand pounds-an enormous sum in those days-for the completion of some purchase. Perhaps it is no wonder, then, that Shakespeare made his dedication to Venus and Adonis florid, indeed. 
Nevertheless, considering that we know Shakespeare as a transcendent genius, and that Southampton was merely a rich young man who was no more than twenty years old when Venus and Adonis was published, there is something unpleasantly sycophantic about the dedication. Shakespeare pretends to worry, for instance- 


óhow the world will censure me for choosing so strong a prop to support so weak a burthen;




-Dedication


Can he really doubt his own power so, or overestimate the young man so egregiously? Surely not. Can he be indulging in sarcasm? That would be foolishly risky and nothing in Shakespeare's career would lead us to suppose him a devil-may-care. He was rather the reverse. 
Well then, is he merely buttering up a patron with a fat money belt? Perhaps so. It is easy to believe that this is the ordinary language of poets to patrons but it would still hurt us to suppose that Shakespeare would conform to so degrading a custom. 
But, to be complete, it is also possible that there was a homosexual attachment and Shakespeare was writing out of love. This is possible. Some think most of Shakespeare's 154 sonnets were written in this period of his life; most of them seem addressed to a young man, possibly (but not certainly) to Southampton [Shakespeare's sonnets, and a handful of other short poems attributed to him, are not taken up in this book. They are primarily emotional and personal, with little or none of the type of background I am dealing with here.]. The twentieth sonnet seems to have the frankest homosexual content. It begins: 


A woman's face, with Nature's own hand painted, Hast thou, the master mistress of my passion;




ólines 1-2


But it denies overt homosexuality, ending: 


And for a woman wert thou first created,

Till Nature as she wrought thee fell a-doting

And by addition me of thee defeated

By adding one thing to my purpose nothing.

But since she prick'd thee out for women's pleasure,

Mine be thy love, and thy love's use their treasure.




ólines 9-14 


In addition, there are a number of events in Shakespeare's plays that can be interpreted from a homosexual point of view, yet which Shakespeare presents most sympathetically. There are the close male friendships, even to threatened death, as is Antonio's for Bassanio in The Merchant of Venice (see page I-501). There is Lucius' passion for Fidele in Cymbe-line (see page II-72) and the scene in which Orlando woos Ganymede in As You Like It (see page I-571). 
But too little is known of Shakespeare's life to go any further than this. Any speculations as to his homosexual urges and to the extent to which he gave in to them, if they existed, can never be anything more than speculations.


Ö the first heir of my invention Ö





Shakespeare goes on to say, in his dedication, 


Ö if the first heir of my invention prove deformed, I shall be sorry it had so noble a godfatherÖ




óDedication 


Venus and Adonis was published about April 1593, at which time Shakespeare was just twenty-nine. He had already established himself as a competent actor and had probably done considerable patching of old plays; notably Henry VI, Part One (see page II-640). Henry VI, Part Two and Henry VI, Part Three were mostly or entirely his and it is possible he had already written two comedies: The Comedy of Errors and Love's Labor's Lost. It is even possible that two more plays, Titus Andronicus and Richard III were in the process of production. 
These works, however, were meant to be played, not read, and it was to be years before they were actually published. Venus and Adonis was the first piece of Shakespeare's writings that actually appeared in print, and it was in that sense only "the first heir of my invention." 
Shakespeare seems, by the way, to have turned to narrative poetry only because of a siege of enforced idleness. The London theaters were closed between mid-1592 and mid-1594 as a result of a heightened incidence of plagues, and Shakespeare used the additional time on his hands to write Venus and Adonis and The Rape of Lucrece. 


Rose-cheek'd Adonis...




The poem begins early in the day, with Adonis making ready to hunt: 


Even as the sun with purple-colour'd face Had ta'en his last leave of the weeping morn,

Rose-cheek'd Adonis hied him to the chase. Hunting he lov'd, but love he laugh'd to scorn.





ólines 1-4 


Adonis is the Greek version of a Semitic vegetation god. From the beginnings of agriculture, there must have been a kind of relief each year among the farmers that, after the death of vegetation in the fall, there was a rebirth in the spring. Rituals personifying this death-and-rebirth were invented and they must have been looked upon as a kind of flattering homage to Nature (or even as a hint to a possibly forgetful Nature), inducing her to continue. The feeling would surely arise at last that only a thorough-going carrying through of the ritual each year would bring about a fertile growing season and a good harvest, and upon that, life through the barren winter would depend. 
In that sense, the type of myth of which the tale of Venus and Adonis is representative (though prettied-up from its straightforward origins by the sophisticated imaginations of the later classical poets), reflects the historic birth of agriculture. It can be tied to the great event, some seven thousand years before the Trojan War, that saw the first deliberate cultivation and harvest of wild grain in the foothills of the Zagros Mountains in what is now western Iran. 
The Sumerians, about 2000 b.c., represented the agricultural cycle with a god, Dumu-zi, who died and was resurrected; a death-and-resurrection which was celebrated each year by the people of the land. The myth and the ritual were adopted by the later Babylonians and Assyrians-the Semitic peoples who succeeded the Sumerians in the land of the Tigris and Euphrates. In the Semitic language of Babylonia, the name of the vegetation god became Tammuz. 
In the Tammuz myth, the god descends into the underworld after his death and all vegetation dies with him. A wailing goddess (variously described as his sister, mother, or wife) manages to rescue him. In the most familiar form of the myth, the rescuer is Ishtar, his wife or love. 
The passionate rites for Tammuz were exceedingly attractive to women in particular. They found emotional relief in the wailing and utter grief that symbolized Tammuz' death and in the almost orgiastic joy that came when the priests raised the cry that he was reborn. 
The stern prophets of Israel had a hard job keeping the Israelite women from joining in this pagan rite. The tale of Jephthah's daughter was possibly an attempt to solve the problem by converting the rite into a patriotic commemoration. The Israelite general Jephthah had beaten the enemy, after making a rash vow to sacrifice the first living thing that came to greet him on his return. It turned out to be his daughter, whom he sacrificed. The Bible goes on to explain: "And it was a custom in Israel, That the daughters of Israel went yearly to lament the daughter of Jephthah the Gileadite four days in a year" (Judges 11:39-40). 
If so, this pious wile did not work. Ezekiel, at the time of the Judean exile in Babylon, enumerated the sins of the Jews of the time and said that in the very Temple in Jerusalem "there sat women weeping for Tammuz" (Ezekiel 8:14). 
And in one way, Tammuz has remained in Jewish consciousness ever since. The Babylonians named a month in honor of the god and the exiled Jews, in adopting the Babylonian calendar, adopted the month too. Even today, one of the months of the Jewish calendar (falling in the latter half of June and the earlier half of July) is called Tammuz. 
The rites of a dead-and-resurrected God occur in the Greek myths too. 
There is the case of Demeter (the grain goddess), whose daughter, Persephone, is abducted by Hades, the god of the underworld. While Persephone is gone, all grain withers, but finally Demeter manages to rescue her daughter under conditions that allow herself and Hades to share her, each for part of the year. The Eleusinian Mysteries, secret religious rites among the Greeks, seem to have involved the celebration of this death-and-resurrection, expanding it to include the resurrection of the human soul after the death of the human body. 
As the Greeks and the Semites of the East gained more and more in the way of cultural interchange, the Tammuz version entered Greek mythology directly. Tammuz became Adonis. 
The name shift is no mystery. Names of gods are always a little difficult to handle in any culture that considers the name of an object to be almost the equivalent of the object itself. To touch the name with one's own tongue and breath is a form of blasphemy and so circumlocutions are used. Instead of saying Tammuz, one says Lord (just as, in the Bible, Lord is used in place of Yahveh). 
The Semitic term for "Lord" is "Adonai" and it was "Adonai," rather than "Tammuz," that was adopted by the Greeks. They added the final s, which is an almost invariable ending on Greek proper names, making it "Adonis." 
Since Ishtar was the lover of Tammuz in the Babylonian myth, the equivalent of Ishtar would have to be the lover of Adonis in the Greek myth. The Greek equivalent of Ishtar was Aphrodite, the goddess of love and beauty. 
The Greek myth had Adonis born the son of King Theias of Assyria. No such king existed in actual history, to be sure, but this is a hint of the Babylonian origin of the myth. We might suppose, therefore, that the scene of the poem is Babylonia, though Shakespeare never indicates any particular place-and perhaps gave the matter no thought at all. 
Adonis' mother was Myrrha, who was herself the daughter of Theias. Myrrha had conceived an incestuous passion for her father and managed to sneak into his bed, with the result that she became pregnant by him. When the shocked father discovered the truth, he would have killed her, but the pitying gods changed her into the myrrh tree. 
The myrrh tree yields a bitter resinous sap (myrrh), which oozes out when the bark is split. (The word "myrrh" is from an Arabic word meaning "bitter.") The sap is valued for its uses as incense and in cosmetics and embalming. (It was one of the three gifts brought to the infant Jesus by the wise men-"they presented unto him gifts; gold, and frankincense, and myrrh," Matthew 2:11.) 
The sap on being exposed to air hardens into resinous drops called "tears," and these are supposed to represent the tears of Myrrha over the terrible thing she had done. (Working backward, we can suppose that this part of the myth arose over the attempt to explain why a tree should seem to weep.) 
In the Greek myth, the myrrh tree into which Myrrha had been changed split after nine months, and the infant Adonis emerged. Aphrodite (who had inspired Myrrha's fatal love in the first place) felt remorse at the event and rescued Adonis. She placed him in a box and gave him to Persephone, goddess of the underworld, for temporary safekeeping. Persephone, noting the beauty of the child, refused to give him back and there was a quarrel that ended with each having him part of the time. 
Here again is the tale of whiter (Adonis with Persephone) and summer (Adonis with Aphrodite), enlivened, in the Greek way, by a story of forbidden love. 
This, at least, is the myth as told by Apollodorus, an Athenian poet who lived in the second century b.c. Shakespeare does not follow this. He begins with Adonis as a grown man, says nothing of his origins, and concerns himself only with the final stage of the myth, following a version given by Ovid. 
Ovid, who seems to have been Shakespeare's favorite classical author, is the Roman poet whose name in full was Publius Ovidius Naso. About a.d. 1 he was writing his most famous work-a version, in Latin verse, of those Greek myths that involved the transformation ("metamorphosis") of one living thing into another. 
Ovid's book is therefore called Metamorphoses, and the myth of Adonis is included, since his mother had been turned into a myrrh tree. 


Sick-tkoughted VenusÖ







In the final couplet of the first stanza, Shakespeare introduces the other member of the mythical duo: 


Sick-thoughted Venus makes amain unto him And like a bold-fac'd suitor gins to woo him.





ólines 5-6 


This is not Aphrodite, notice, as it would be if Shakespeare were following the work of the Greek poet Apollodorus. Shakespeare is using the name of a Roman goddess instead, the name used by Ovid. 
The Romans in the early centuries of their history had a primitive religion, with numerous gods and goddesses of a rather arid nature who were not to be compared with the sophisticated deities of the much more cultivated Greeks. From the third century b.c. onward, the Romans fell more and more under the spell of Greek culture and were impelled to adopt the beautiful and intricate Greek mythology. They could not very well drop their own deities; instead they compromised by identifying their own gods with the roughly corresponding gods of the Greeks and retold the Greek myths using the Roman names. 
Here is a list of the chief gods and goddesses in their Roman and Greek versions: 


RomanGreek 
JupiterZeus chief of the gods 
Juno Hera his wife 
Minerva Athena goddess of wisdom and practical arts 
Diana Artemisgoddess of the moon and the hunt 
MercuryHermes messenger of the gods 
Mars Ares god of war 
Vulcan Hephaestusgod of fire and the forge 
Venus Aphroditegoddess of love and beauty 
Neptune Poseidon god of the sea 
Vesta Hestia goddess of the hearth and home 
Dis Hades god of the underworld 
Ceres Demetergoddess of grain and agriculture 
Proserpina Persephone goddess of the underworld 


One major god had, apparently, no Roman equivalent at all, which is not strange, for he was the most Greek of all the Greek gods. He was Apollo, the god of youth and the fine arts (and in later poetry, of the sun as well). The Romans used the Greek name, therefore. They also used Hades or, its equivalent, Pluto, in preference to their own Dis, since Dis (a fearsome underground deity) was not popular with them and they avoided naming him. 
Two of the mortal heroes that people the Greek legends, and who play a prominent part in Shakespearean allusions, have altered names given them by the Romans. Thus, the greatest and strongest of all the Greek heroes was Heracles, but the Romans called him Hercules. Again, the wiliest of the Greeks at the siege of Troy was Odysseus, whom the Romans called Ulysses. 
In medieval Europe the Greek myths reached the west only through such Roman filters as Ovid and therefore the names used were all Roman. Shakespeare uses the Roman names of the gods invariably. 
I will conform to Shakespearean usage, though it goes against the grain to do so, since it is far more appropriate to use the Greek names in dealing with Greek myths. I will ease my conscience, therefore, by occasionally placing the Greek name in parentheses, just to remind the reader of its existence. 
Shakespeare departs from his source material in one important way. He makes Adonis reluctant to respond to Venus. "Hunting he loved, but love he laughed to scorn" and Venus, out of sheer necessity, must reverse the role of the sexes and "like a bold-fac'd suitor" be the aggressor. 
There is precedent for this in Greek mythology. There was, for instance, Hermaphroditus, the son of Hermes and Aphrodite. He was beloved by a fountain nymph, Salmacis, but he repulsed her coldly. Once, however, when he was bathing in her spring, she was able to unite with bun hi love, and fearing that she might never be able to repeat the act, prayed the gods that she might remain united with him physically forever. 
Her prayer was granted and thereafter Hermaphroditus had the genital equipment of both sexes. The word "hermaphrodite" has, in consequence, entered the English language to represent that pathological bisexual condition. 
A much better known example is mentioned by Venus herself in this poem. She complains of Adonis' coldness and accuses him of loving only himself. She warns him he runs risks in consequence, saying: 


Narcissus so himself himself forsook, And died to kiss his shadow in the brook.





ólines 161-62 


The tale of Narcissus begins with a nymph, Echo, who had, at Jupiter's orders, kept Juno busy with prolonged and idle gossip while Jupiter busied himself with various nymphs. When Juno found out, she punished Echo by depriving her of her voice-except that she was permitted to repeat the last words of anything said to her. 
Unhappy Echo fell in love, thereafter, with Narcissus, a handsome youth who would love no one. She tried to woo him, but could only repeat his last words, and he fled from her impatiently, so that Echo pined away until only her voice was left. 
And then one day Narcissus came across a clear spring in which he saw his own face. He had never seen his face before and, staring at it now, fell in love with it. He attempted to woo it, but the shadow could not respond and, in effect, rejected him, so that "himself himself forsook." Attempting, finally, to kiss his shadow, Narcissus drowned, and he too added a word to our language-"narcissism," the morbid love of one's self. 
This trick of having Adonis cold to Venus gives Shakespeare a chance to turn his poetic powers to a less hackneyed motif than that of a man's praise of womanly beauty. He can turn to the harder and less familiar task of a woman's praise of manly beauty. 
Then too, if we go along with the homosexual component of Shakespeare, it may be significant that a poem dedicated to young Southampton features the prolonged praise of manly beauty and a prolonged pleading for a love that is not, and cannot, be given. 


Ö god of war




Venus points out that she is rarely refused when she asks for love: 


"I have been wooed, as I entreat thee now, Even by the stern and direful god of war,





ólines 97-98 


One of the most famous tales of Venus/Aphrodite is her love affair with Mars/Ares. The tale is told in the Odyssey (Homer's epic poem concerning the voyages of Odysseus), in which Venus is pictured as married to Vulcan/Hephaestus, the ugly and lame smith god. Venus is, under these conditions, quite ready to respond to the wooing of Mars. 
Vulcan, suspecting that Venus is being unfaithful, rigged up a device whereby an unbreakable net could fall upon the bed and catch Venus and Mars in the position of love. This was done; Mars and Venus were helplessly bound together while the angry Vulcan called in the other gods to witness his wife's criminal behavior. Unfortunately for himself, the reaction of the gods was not one of sympathy for Vulcan, but rather of envy for Mars. 


And Titan Ö




By now, the sun was high in the sky: 


And Titan, tired in the midday heat,

With burning eye did hotly overlook them,

Wishing Adonis had his team to guide,

So he were like him, and by Venus' side.





ólines 177-80 


In the Greek myths, Jupiter/Zeus and his fellow deities had not always ruled the universe. Before them had been a race of older gods whom they supplanted. (Perhaps this is a reflection in myth of the supercession of the pre-Greeks of the Balkan peninsula by the invading Greek tribes.) 
These older gods were called Titans, and their chief was Cronus, whom the Romans called Saturn. 
The Titan who served as the god of the sun was Hyperion. One way of saying this, mythologically, was to make him the father of Helios (the Greek word for "sun"). Both "Hyperion" and "Helios" are thus used in classic-minded literature to represent the sun. Since both are considered Titans, the sun can be called, as here, "Titan." 
The sun was always pictured as a blazing, golden chariot, driven by a team of wild, fiery horses. It is with this in mind that Shakespeare pictures the "Titan" as wishing Adonis held the reins and he himself were lying by Venus. 
In later Greek poetry, Apollo was made the god of the sun, and Shakespeare, in the course of his writing, uses "Apollo" to symbolize the sun too. The Titaness Phoebe, a sister of Hyperion, was the goddess of the moon, and the myths make Apollo a grandson (on his mother's side) of Phoebe. He inherits the ancient name in its masculine form, then, and is called Phoebus or Phoebus Apollo, "Phoebus" too is used by Shakespeare to represent the sun. 


Thy mermaid's voice Ö




Adonis is only irritated by Venus' pleadings. While she keeps him back from the hunt with her attempted love-making, his stallion spies a mare and breaks loose. Adonis fails to recapture him and petulantly scolds Venus, blaming her for the loss. 
Venus laments that she suffers twice, first because he will not speak to her, and second because when at last he does, it is to scold her. She says: 


Thy mermaid's voice hath done me double wrong;





óline 429 


The Greeks had, in their myths, tales of beautiful young women, called sirens, who rested on the rocks of a seashore and sang in heavenly voices. Sailors passing by would be attracted by them and, steering their boats nearer, would meet death upon the rocks. 
Originally sirens may have been wind spirits carrying off the souls of the dead, and were sometimes pictured with birds' bodies. However, the wind was more deadly on sea than on land, and the sirens became more and more closely associated with the sea until they were pictured as creatures who were women down to the waist and fish below that. 
These are the "mermaids" ("sea-maids"), who bewitch sailors to their doom on the rocks, as they sit combing their long hair and singing. The famous German poem "Die Lorelei" is of such a creature. 
So when Venus speaks of Adonis' "mermaid voice" she means a beautiful voice that is luring her to doom.


Ö worse than Tantalus'.. .






The day is drawing to a close and Adonis finally manages to get Venus to promise to leave him alone if he kisses her. He proceeds to do so but she returns the embrace in such full measure that he has all he can do to disengage himself. He then reveals that the next day he intends to hunt boar.
At this Venus is sent into a paroxysm of fear, lest he be killed in so dangerous a pursuit. She seizes him and they fall to the ground in the very position of love. Yet even so, to Venus' frustration, he will do nothing. 


That worse than Tantalus' is her annoy To clip Elysium and to lack her joy.





ólines 599-600 


Tantalus was a Peloponnesian king who was an intimate friend of Jupiter and the other gods. He was admitted to their feasts and in return he invited them to his house. For some reason, perhaps to test their divine knowledge, he served them the flesh of his own son when they were feasting at his house. The gods were horrified. They restored the son to life, and, for his detestable crime, Tantalus was killed by Jupiter's lightning bolt. What's more, Tantalus was sent to Tartarus, the region beneath Hades where particularly wicked people were specially punished. 
Tantalus' punishment was to stand in water up to his neck in eternal frustration. He was consumed by thirst, but every time he stooped to drink, the water swirled downward. Fruit-laden branches hovered temptingly near and he was famished, but every time he reached to snatch a fruit, it whisked away. It is from this that the word "tantalize" is derived. 
For Venus, to have Adonis exactly where he ought to be and yet have him make no use of the fact seems a frustration worse than that of Tantalus. She was in Tartarus, even though she was "clipping" (holding) Elysium, which was the Greek version of Paradise. 
In the Homeric writings, Elysium or "the Elysian plain" existed in the far west, the dimly explored (and therefore wonder-filled) western regions of the Mediterranean Sea, where heroes were taken after death to live in eternal bliss. By later writers this had to be transported beyond the ocean rim, for explorers reached the westernmost point of the Mediterranean shores without finding Elysium. The Greek poet Hesiod, writing a century after Homer, speaks of "the Islands of the Blest" lying out in the Atlantic. 
As geographic knowledge continued to broaden, the Roman poet Vergil, writing six centuries after Hesiod, was forced to move Elysium underground, making it a portion of Hades devoted to delight. It was suffused with an eternal spring. Its flowers, groves, and fountains were lit by soft sunshine during the day and by the familiar constellations at night. Then the righteous, resting on banks of resilient and perfumed flowers, lived in never-ending felicity. 


Ö modest Dian ...




Venus urges Adonis to hunt foxes or hares, anything that is not dangerous, rather than boars. Adonis, having paid his kiss, finds that he still cannot disengage himself from her wild grasp. It is night already and he is annoyed at this, for it will be hard to find his way. Venus turns this too into praise of Adonis' beauty. 


So do thy lips

Make modest Dian cloudy and forlorn,

Lest she should steal a kiss and die forsworn.

Now of this dark night I perceive the reason:

Cynthia for shame obscures her silver shine,





ólines 724-28 


The Titaness who served as goddess of the moon was Phoebe. However, Hyperion, the Titan god of the sun, had not only Helios as a son but Selene as a daughter. "Selene" is the Greek word for "moon" and that name was the most common mythological representation of the moon. 
The later poets, however, transferred the duty of serving as goddess of the moon to Diana/Artemis, the sister of Apollo. She is also called Cynthia because she was supposed to have been born on a mountain called Cynthus on a small island in the Aegean Sea. Apollo is therefore, but much less frequently, called Cynthius. 
Diana is, of all the Greek goddesses, the most insistently virgin. Venus therefore says that Adonis may lose his way or trip because the night is dark; and the night is dark because the moon hides herself, lest while shining on Adonis' beautiful face she be unable to resist kissing him, thus ruining her rigid chastity. 


A purple flower...




Venus' urgings are all in vain. The next day he hunts the boar and is slain. The horrified Venus finds him: 


And in his blood, that on the ground lay spill'd

A purple flower sprung up, check'red with white,

Resembling well his pale cheeks and the blood

'Which in round drops upon their whiteness stood.





ólines 1167-70 


The flower that arose out of the blood, according to the myth, was the anemone, and its appearance makes a second reason why the tale qualifies for inclusion in Ovid's Metamorphoses. 
This is not the only flower that was supposed to have originated out of the blood of a mortal loved by a god. 
There was the case, for instance, of a beautiful Spartan prince, Hya-cinthus, with whom Apollo fell in love. (The Greeks had a tolerant and even approving attitude toward male homosexuality, and the Greek gods indulged in it too.) The West Wind was also in love with Hyacinthus and when Apollo and Hyacinthus were exercising by throwing the discus, the West Wind, out of jealousy, blew the discus against the boy's head, killing him. From the blood of Hyacinthus sprang the hyacinth, which carries on its petals markings that look like the first two letters of the name of Hyacinthus (in Greek), two letters which, coincidentally, mean "woe." 


Ö to Paphos. ..




Shakespeare's version of the story ends there, with the disastrous climax of Adonis' death. The last, and 199th, stanza, reads: 


Thus weary of the world, away she hies

And yokes her silver doves, by whose swift aid

Their mistress, mounted, through the empty skies ´

In her light chariot quickly is convey'd,

Holding their course to Paphos, where their queen

Means to immure herself and not be seen.





ólines 1189-94 


The doves, for their amorous dispositions, their whiteness and gentleness, are fitting representations of romantic love and are therefore associated with Venus. Shakespeare makes a number of allusions to her doves in the course of his writings. 
Paphos is a town on the western shore of the island of Cyprus, a town particularly dedicated to the worship of Venus. She is sometimes called the "Paphian goddess" as a result and sometimes "Cypris." 
In the Greek myth, however, the tale of Adonis does not end with his death and Venus' mourning. In the proper fashion of death-and-resurrection, Venus goes to Jupiter and persuades him to make an arrangement whereby Proserpina, queen of the underworld, can have Adonis for half the year and she for the other half. And thus, Adonis, like the vegetation god he is, dies and is resurrected each year. 








2. A Midsummer Night's Dream


The title of this play sets its tone. "Midsummer" refers to the summer solstice, when the noonday sun reaches the most elevated point in the heavens. By our present calendar, this is June 21. (To be sure this is only the beginning of summer by modern convention and by temperature considerations.) 
The actual calendar day of the solstice has varied at different times because calendars themselves have. The Midsummer Day in English tradition is June 24, which is celebrated as the birthday of John the Baptist and which therefore has a Christian distinction as well as an earlier pagan one. The preceding night would be "Midsummer Night." 
There is a folk belief that extreme heat is a cause of madness (hence the phrase "midsummer madness") and this is not entirely a fable. The higher the sun and the longer it beats down, the more likely one is to get sunstroke, and mild attacks of sunstroke could be conducive to all sorts of hallucinatory experiences. Midsummer, then, is the time when people are most apt to imagine fantastic experiences. 
In calling the play A Midsummer Night's Dream, then, Shakespeare is deliberately describing it as a piece of utter fantasy. It does not imply, however, that the play actually takes place on Midsummer Night. Only one reference in the play seems to set a time and that makes it seem considerably earlier; see page I-45. 


Ö fair Hippolyta. ..




The play opens in a spirit of high festivity. A marriage is about to take place. The scene is set in the palace of Theseus, Duke of Athens, and it is he who speaks: 


Now, fair Hippolyta, our nuptial hour

Draws on apace.

Four happy days bring in Another moon;





óAct I, scene i, lines 1-3


Theseus was the great hero of Athens, who (according to Greek legend) was the first to unify the peninsula of Attica under the rule of the city of Athens. He was supposed to have lived in the generation before the Trojan War and we may therefore put the time of the play as about 1230 b.c. (which makes this play the earliest from the standpoint of background chronology, so that I place it immediately after Venus and Adonis.) 
As the centuries wore on, the imaginative Athenians invented more and more hero tales with which to adorn the life of their founder until, finally, he was second only to Hercules in the number of adventures he was given. 
One tale involving Theseus concerns his expedition to a land of warrior women. The women, the legend tells us, cauterized the left breast in infancy so that it never developed and left that side free for the maneuvering of a shield. They were called "Amazons," from a Greek word meaning "breastless." 
Theseus defeated the Amazons and captured their queen, Antiope, keeping her as his love. He married her and by her had a son, Hippoly-tus. The name of Hippolytus was famous in Greek legend because he was the center of a very famous tale involving the hopeless love for him of his stepmother, Phaedra. 
A feminine version of Hippolytus' name, Hippolyta, worked its way backward therefore and was given to his mother in place of the older name, Antiope. This was all the easier to do because in the tale of another expedition against the Amazons, that of Hercules, Hippolyta was indeed given as the name of their queen. Shakespeare makes use of Hippolyta as the name of Theseus' Amazon queen, not only here, but also in The Two Noble Kinsmen (see page I-56). 
Theseus is listed in the cast of characters as "Duke of Athens." This is an anachronism, for Athens was not a duchy or anything analogous to it in Theseus' time. It was what we would today call a kingdom and Theseus was its king. 
The title "Duke of Athens" did not, however, come out of nowhere. In 1204 a party of Crusaders from the West (overthrew the Byzantine Empire, which then ruled Greece, took and sacked its capital, Constantinople, and divided up what they could of the Empire among themselves, fashioning new states, Western style. One of these fragments was the "Duchy of Athens," which included the regions about Athens and Thebes. 
The Duchy of Athens continued in existence for ï two and a half centuries. Finally, in 1456, it was absorbed into the empires of the Ottoman Turks. Shakespeare's play, probably written about 1595, \was only a century and a half removed from this Duchy of Athens, and the title of "Duke" would seem a natural one to the Elizabethan audience. 
Since A Midsummer Night's Dream centers about a wedding, since it is gay and frothy and all about love and lovers, it seems natural to suppose that it was written for, and originally produced as, part of the entertainmerit at a wedding feast. Scholars have tried to guess which wedding it might have been and six different ones have been suggested, but none is very likely. The marriages of the two men most likely to have the use of Shakespeare's services in this way, the Earl of Southampton (see page I-3) and the Earl of Essex (Elizabeth's favorite and a great friend of Southampton), both took place in 1598, which is too late for the play. 


Ö Cupid's strongest bow




The marriage festivities of Theseus and Hippolyta serve as the background plot, or the "frame," of the play. In the foreground are three other sets of events, Involving totally disparate groups of characters whom Shakespeare cleverly weaves together. 
The first of these subplots is introduced at once, as a set of well-born Athenians break in upon Theseus. At their head is Egeus, who is vexed and annoyed because his daughter, Hermia, will not agree to marry a young man named Demetrius. Hermia insists stubbornly that she is in love with Lysander, of whom her father does not approve. 
Lysander himself points out that Demetrius had previously been in love with Helena, a friend of Hermia's, and that Helena still returned that love. 
All will not do. Despite Hermia's emotion and Lysander's reason, Egeus insists on having his way, as is his legal right. Theseus decides that by his own wedding day Hermia must have agreed to obey her father. The alternatives are death or lifelong celibacy. All then leave the stage, but Lysander and Hermia. 
No recourse but flight seems left them. Lysander suggests that Hermia meet him in the wood outside Athens and that they flee to a rich aunt of his who lives outside Athenian territory. There they can marry. 
Hermia agrees to meet him that very night, swearing to do so in a lyrical outburst of romantic vows: 


/ swear to thee, by Cupid's strongest bow,

By his best arrow with the golden head,

By the simplicity of Venus' doves,

By that which knitteth souls and prospers loves,

And by that fire which burned the Carthage queen,

When the false Troyan under sail was seen,





óAct I, scene i, lines 169-74 


Cupid is the Latin version of the Greek Eros, both of whom were personifications of sexual passion. Cupid (Eros) is earliest mentioned in the works of the Greek poet Hesiod, who wrote in the eighth century b.c. There he represented the impersonal force of attraction that created all things. In later centuries Cupid was personified as a young man, then as a boy, and finally as an infant rather like the cherubs in our own art. 
In the Greek myths he was given various sets of parents; Venus and Mars (see page I-11) in the best-known version. He was considered to be mischievous, of course, as anyone could see who witnesses the ridiculous events brought about by love. He was sometimes depicted as blind, since love seemed to afflict the most mismatched couples (mismatched by all standards except those clearly visible to the lovers themselves). 
He was supposed to possess a bow and arrows, for the onset of love (which is sometimes sudden, or seems sudden in later reminiscence) resembles a quick arrow in the heart. In later tales, Cupid was given two types of arrows, one with a golden tip to produce love, and another with a leaden tip to produce hate. Sometimes the hate arrows were made the property of a companion deity, Anteros ("opposed to Eros"). 
Doves were birds sacred to Venus (see page 1-15) and they too served as appropriate vehicles for lovers' oaths. 
The "Carthage queen" is a reference to one of Shakespeare's favorite personages in classical legend and one to which he often refers. She is Dido, who in 814 b.c. (according to legend), founded the North African city of Carthage, which in later centuries dominated the western Mediterranean and rivaled Rome itself. 
The best-known story in connection with Dido involves the Trojan hero Aeneas. Aeneas is one of the fighters on the Trojan side who survived the destruction of Troy. Indeed, at one point in the Iliad, Aeneas is on the point of being destroyed by the invincible Achilles, and is saved by the intervention of the gods. The excuse is that Jupiter (Zeus) "intends that Aeneas shall rule the surviving Trojan stock, and his children's children after him." 
Naturally, numerous tales were later invented that gave Aeneas adventures after the fall of Troy. Of these, the one that is best known today was not told by a Greek at all but by a Roman poet, Publius Vergilius Maro (best known among English-speaking people as Vergil). In the reign of Augustus, first of the Roman emperors, in the last decades of the first century b.c., Vergil wrote a tale, in imitation of Homer, regarding the escape of Aeneas from burning Troy and his wanderings over the Mediterranean Sea. The epic poem he wrote was named Aeneid for its hero. 
Eventually, Aeneas lands in Carthage and meets Queen Dido. (To be sure, the Trojan War was in 1200 b.c. and Queen Dido lived in 800 b.c., making four centuries between them, but Vergil didn't care about that and neither-if the truth be known-do we, in reading the Aeneid.) 
Dido falls desperately in love with the handsome Trojan stranger; their love is consummated and for a moment it seems that all will be happy. But Aeneas is a "false Troyan" who betrays the Queen. The gods warn him that his divinely appointed task is to go to Italy, there to found a line which was eventually to give rise to Rome. Quietly, he sneaks away. 
Dido, in despair, builds a funeral pyre on the shore, sets it on fire, and throws herself on the flames, dying with her eyes fixed on the disappearing ship. Few readers can feel any sympathy for Vergil's rather pallid hero. Despite Vergil's own attempt to make it all seem very pious of Aeneas to follow the divine dictates, our hearts are all with the injured Carthaginian and not with the scuttling Trojan. Dido has remained ever since an epitome of the betrayed woman. 
Of course, it is anachronistic of Hermia to speak of Dido and Aeneas, since that took place after the Trojan War and Theseus lived before-but, again, that is a matter of little moment. 


Ö when Phoebe doth behold




Helena now enters. She is a bosom friend of Hermia's and the friendship has remained unbroken, apparently, even though Demetrius, whom Helena desperately loves, is as desperately wooing Hermia. 
The two lovers softheartedly decide to tell Helena of their own plan of flight, in order to reassure her that the obstacle to her love of Demetrius will be removed. Lysander says their flight will take place: 


Tomorrow night, when Phoebe doth behold

Her silver visage in the wat'ry glass





óAct I, scene i, lines 209-10 


Phoebe is a way of referring to the moon, making use of the oldest moon goddess in classical myth and harking back to the Titaness (see page I-12). 
It is odd, though, that Lysander should refer to the moon as lighting up the night, for at the very beginning of the play, Theseus has specifically stated that it is only four nights to the next new moon. This means that the old moon is now a crescent which appears only in the hours immediately preceding the dawn. 
Yet it is to be understood that the entire magic night that is soon to follow is moonlit. In a way, it is essential. The soft moonlight will be just enough to make things seem not quite what they are. Who would argue with it? Let there be a full moon throughout the night even if astronomy says it is impossible. 
Of course, the kindly motive that led Hermia and Lysander to tell Helena their plans makes trouble at once. Helena, virtually mad with love, promptly tells Demetrius of the plan, hoping thereby to gam his gratitude (and failing).


Ö all our companyÖ




The second scene of the play introduces a third strand of plot, one that does not involve aristocrats, but laboring men. Indeed, the second scene is laid in the house of one of them, a carpenter. 
These laborers have none of the aura of Athenian aristocrat about them; indeed, they are in every respect, even down to their names, comic Englishmen. This sort of thing is true in all of Shakespeare's plays. Of whatever nationality and historical period the main characters are represented as being, the lower classes are always portrayed as Englishmen of Shakespeare's own time. 
The leader of the group, the one in whose house they are meeting, looks about and asks, portentously, 


Is all our company here?





óAct I, scene ii, line 1
[In numbering the lines for reference there would be no problem if nothing but verse were involved, as in Venus and Adonis and in the first scene of A Midsummer Night's Dream. Then the identity and numbering of the lines are fixed. Where we encounter prose, as we do now for the first time, the lines depend on the design of type and the width of the columns. The numbering then varies from edition to edition and can alter the number in passages of verse too, if they follow passages of prose in the same scene. In this book, I am using the numbering system given in "The Signet Classic Shakespeare." If the reader is referring to some other edition, he will often have to look a little to either side of the line number, so to speak, but he will not be far off and his search will not be difficult.] 


This leader is Peter Quince, the carpenter, and it is possible in his case and in all the others to see a connection between the name and the occupation. According to a footnote in the Signet Classic Shakespeare edition, "quines" are blocks of wood used for building and therefore characteristic of carpenters. 
The other men of the company are: 
Nick Bottom the weaver; one of the numerous meanings of "bottom" is a "skein of thread." 
Francis Flute, the bellows-mender, which is apt since the sides of a bellows are fluted. 
Tom Snout, the tinker, who deals largely with the repair of kettles, which are characterized by a snout (or spout). 
Snug the joiner, an occupation which joins pieces of wood, it is to be hoped snugly. 
Finally, there is Starveling the tailor, a name which is evidence that there has long been a tradition that tailors are weak, cowardly, effeminate creatures, perhaps because they work so much on women's clothes and because it is so easy to assume that a manly man would not be interested in such an occupation. 


"Ö Pyramus and Thisby"




The six laborers have met in order to arrange the production of a play intended to celebrate the marriage of Theseus and Hippolyta. Quince announces the name of the play: 


Ö our play is, "The most lamentable comedy, and most cruel death of Pyramus and Thisby."





óAct I, scene ii, lines ll-i; 


The tale of Pyramus and Thisbe is found in Ovid's Metamorphose: (see page I-8) and has no known source beyond that. 
Pyramus and Thisbe were a youth and maiden of Babylon who lived in adjoining houses and who loved each other but were kept separate by the enmity of their parents. They talked through a chink in the wall that separated the estates and arranged to meet outside the city one night. 
Thisbe got there first, but was frightened by a lion and fled, leaving he: veil behind. The lion, who had just killed an ox, snapped at the veil, leaving it bloody. Pyramus arrived, found the lion's footprints and the blood; veil. Coming to a natural conclusion, he killed himself. When Thisbe re turned, she found Pyramus' dead body and killed herself as well. 
There is a strange similarity between this tale and that of Romeo and Juliet, a play that was written at just about the time A Midsummer Night's Dream was being written. Did Shakespeare's satirical treatment of the Pyramus-Thisbe story get him interested in doing a serious treatment of it Was the serious treatment already written and was he now poking a little good-natured fun at it? We can never tell. 


Ö play Ercles rarely Ö




The workmen are among Shakespeare's most delightful creations: nai'v and yet well-meaning. And of them all, the most naive and the best meaning is Bottom. Bottom no sooner hears the name of the play but he says, pompously: 


A very good piece of work,

I assure you, and a merry.





óAct I, scene ii, lines 14-15 


Since the tale of Pyramus and Thisbe was well known to any Elizabethan with the slightest education, and known to be an utterly tragic one DBF signed for reducing softhearted maidens to floods of tears, Bottom's own characterization of it reveals him at once. He is illuminated as the cock sure know-it-all who knows nothing; the fool who thinks himself CIS, and yet who, through the very enormity of his folly, makes himself lovable. The workmen are each assigned a role in the play and Bottom is given the part of Pyramus the hero. Despite Bottom's pretense of knowledge concerning the play, it promptly turns out that he doesn't know what kind of part Pyramus is. He is told that Pyramus is a lover and he is wistful over the possibility of other roles, saying: 


Ö my chief humor is for a tyrant.

I could play Ercles rarely, or a part

to tear a cat in, to make all split.





óAct I, scene ii, lines 29-31 


"Ercles" is Bottom's mispronunciation of Hercules (and much of the humor in Shakespeare's plays rests with the mangling of the English language by the uneducated-something sure to raise patronizing chuckles from the better classes in the audience). 
Hercules (Heracles) was the greatest of the legendary heroes of the Greeks. He was a child of Jupiter (Zeus) by an illicit amour with a mortal woman. He thus incurred the vengeful enmity of Juno (Hera). As a result of a crime committed during one of his periodic fits of madness, he was condemned to perform twelve labors for an unworthy relative, Eurystheus, King of Argos. 
The tale of his labors (which may originally have been inspired by the progress of the sun through the twelve constellations of the zodiac) were elaborated and interlarded before, between, and afterward by so many additions illustrative of his superhuman strength that Hercules became the most storied individual in Greek legend. He remained popular through all succeeding ages. 
Since Hercules' forte was sheer brute strength, mingled with madness, he had to be played broadly with a rolling, bass voice, with rage and threats and much flexing of muscles. 
The poorer plays of Elizabethan times were notorious for overacting, something beloved of the lower classes. Certainly Hercules could scarcely be portrayed satisfactorily without overacting, and it was just the sort of role a lovable dimwit like Bottom would yearn for and want to portray. 
The "part to tear a cat in, to make all split" is probably a reference to Samson, the Israelite analogue of Hercules. At one time, the young Samson encountered a lion. "And the Spirit of the Lord came mightily upon him, and he rent him as he would have rent a kid, and he had nothing in his hand" (Judges 14:6). Samson would clearly have suited Bottom every bit as much as Hercules would have. 
The remaining parts are then given out, with the proceedings interrupted at every point by Bottom's yearnings to play each part as it is described, offering to do it in any way that might be desired. It is only when he is told how unimaginably handsome Pyramus is that Bottom recognizes that only he can play the young man and reconciles himself to the task. 
They then all agree to rehearse the play secretly in the wood outside Athens so that no outsiders learn their plans and steal their thunder (the same wood ha which Lysander and Hermia have been scheming to meet). 


Ö the moon's sphere




The second act opens in this very wood, but with neither the well-born lovers nor the low-born actors in view. The wood is already occupied and we are now introduced to still another strand of plot, one that involves sheer fantasy, for it concerns fairies (drawn from Celtic legend rather than Greek mythology, but that doesn't bother anybody). 
Two spirits meet to open the act. The more grotesque spirit asks the more graceful one (named simply "Fairy") where it is going. The answer is, in part: 


I do wander everywhere,

Swifter than the moon's sphere;





óAct II, scene i, lines 6-7 


Here we have a little Greek astronomy. The Greeks believed that the sun, the moon, and the various planets were each set in a transparent sphere. The various spheres were nested one beyond the other, all centered on the earth, which was the very core and midpoint of the universe. 
The spheres moved in various complicated fashions and the end result was to cause the heavenly object attached to it to move against the back-ground of the stars in the fashion observed by human astronomers. The smaller, inner spheres turned more rapidly than the larger, outer ones. The moon was attached to the innermost, smallest sphere and therefore, since that sphere turned most rapidly, it moved against the stars most rapidly. -The Fairy boasts it can move even swifter than the swiftest heavenly body, the moon and its sphere. 
The notion that all the spheres turned about the earth as a center was seriously challenged by the Polish astronomer Nicholas Copernicus in 1543. The issue was strongly disputed and was not finally settled in favor of Copernicus till after Shakespeare's death. Indeed, Copernicus' theory was not inconsistent with spheres (centered about the sun, rather than the earth) and it was not till Kepler showed that the planets moved in elliptical orbits (in 1609) that the notion of the celestial spheres began to die. 
Shakespeare does not, be it noted, take the advanced position of agreeing with Copernicus. In science he is a thoroughgoing conservative who clings tightly to Greek teachings, and the notion of the spheres is a favorite of his. He refers to them in a number of places. 


Ö the Fairy Queen The Fairy continues to describe her duties:

And I serve the Fairy Queen To dew her orbs upon the green.




 -Act II, scene i, lines 8-9


Nowadays we think of fairies (when we think of them at all) as tiny little creatures with butterfly wings, suitable characters for children's tales. Tinkerbell, the fairy in Peter Pan, is a prize example. 
This is strictly a modern, watered-down version, however; a notion to which, actually, the fairies of this very play, A Midsummer Night's Dream have greatly contributed. 
In earlier centuries fairies were taken much more seriously, and well they might be, for they originated in part out of a dim memory of the pagan sprites of the woodlands: the fauns, satyrs, and nymphs of the Greco-Roman mythology, together with the gnomes, elves, and kobolds of the Teutonic imaginings and the sorcerers and "little folk" of Celtic tales. They were the mysterious forces of nature, usually capricious, often malevolent. 
The vague old beliefs clung among the country folk and became old wives' tales, while the Church, recognizing their pagan origins, strove against them. 
Naturally the fairies would have a king and queen, though their names and powers vary from region to region. (For a mythology to become standard, a sophisticated literature is required, and this could scarcely be found in the case of a set of beliefs driven by the Church into refuge among the rude and unlettered.) 
To us, the most familiar name of the Fairy Queen is "Titania," which is the name Shakespeare uses. But it is familiar to us only because Shakespeare uses it in this play. As far as we know, he was the first ever to use that name for the Fairy Queen. 
We can only speculate what inspired Shakespeare to use it. The most likely guess points to Ovid's Metamorphoses, which Shakespeare used so often. At one point Ovid uses the name "Titania" for the moon, referring to Phoebe (see page I-12) by the same line of reasoning that causes one to use "Titan" to refer to the sun (see page I-11). 
This, after all, is a moon-drenched play, a tale of fantastic doings in the dim-lit night. It may have pleased Shakespeare to have the Fairy Queen a version of the moon goddess. 
The "orbs upon the green" are circles of darker grass that can be found here and there on lawns. These are the result of a mushroom's activities: a mushroom which sends out threads in all directions and fruits now and then in gradually wider circles, or parts of circles. Those with sufficient imagination see in these circles the existence of tiny ballrooms for fairies (here viewed as miniature creatures). They are called "fairy rings." 


Ö Oberon is passing fellÖ




The grotesque spirit, on hearing that the other is part of the train of the Fairy Queen, says: 


The King doth keep his revels here tonight.

Take heed the Queen come not within his sight,

For Oberon is passing fell and wrath,




óAct II, scene i, lines 18-20 


The name "Oberon" is not a creation of Shakespeare's. Indeed, it dates back to ancient Teutonic times. The old Germanic legends told of a variety of earth spirits. The dwarfs (undersized, deformed creatures, usually malevolent) had, as their chief occupation, mining. (This is still so, even in Disney's Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs.) We can only wonder whether the legend arose in part out of the first sight by Germanic hunters of miners, caked with soil-with most of them children or undersized adults, since a small body was at a premium for writhing through the underground passages. 
In any case, the king of the dwarfs in the Teutonic tales was Alberich, who is best known to us today for the part he plays in the Nibelung tale as told in Richard Wagner's four operas that begin with the Rhinemaidens and end with the Twilight of the Gods. Alberich is the fiendish dwarf who steals the gold from the Rhinemaidens. When the gold is taken from him in turn, he lays a curse upon all future holders of the gold and it is the working out of this curse that finally ends the universe. 
"Alberich" is softened into "Oberon" in the French. As king of the fairies, rather than of the dwarfs, he plays a part in a popular medieval romance called Huon of Bordeaux. Huon kills the son of Charlemagne in this tale and is sent off on a dangerous quest in punishment. He meets Oberon, who is described as the son of a most curious pair of parents: Julius Caesar of Roman history and Morgan le Fay of Celtic legend. (Yet is that so curious? Medieval French culture represented a mingling of the Celtic peoples of ancient Gaul with the Roman conquerors-together with the later Germanic conquerors, represented by Charlemagne. Huon and Oberon may represent the meeting of Frank with Gallo-Roman.-But never mind, it's Shakespeare I'm talking about in this book.) 
Huon of Bordeaux was translated into English about 1540 by an English statesman and author, John Boucheir, 2d Baron Berners. Shakespeare must surely have been aware of it, and he borrowed "Oberon" from it. 
Oberon and Titania are both in the heavens now. The German-English astronomer William Herschel, who had discovered the planet Uranus in 1781, detected its two outermost satellites (it has five altogether, as far as we know today) in 1787. Departing from the then universal habit of naming bodies of the solar system after Greco-Roman gods and goddesses, he resorted to Shakespeare and named them Titania and Oberon. Oberon is the outermost. 


Ö so sweet a changeling




The reason for the quarrel between Titania and Oberon is explained to the audience at once, for the ungainly spirit says that Oberon is angry with Titania: 


Because that she as her attendant hath

A lovely boy, stolen from an Indian king;

She never had so sweet a changeling.

And jealous Oberon would have the child





óAct II, scene i, lines 21-24 


It was one of the more fear-provoking legends concerning fairies that it was their habit to steal healthy infants from their cradles, substituting sickly or deformed ones. The substituted infants found by the mothers were "changelings." The true horror of this legend lay not so much in the needless fear it provoked among parents but in the fact that when a deformed, retarded, or sickly child was indeed born, that poor infant was sometimes mistreated in order that the fairies might be induced to take it away again. 
In this case, Shakespeare mistakenly refers to the stolen normal child as the changeling. 
This speech, by the way, contains one of the numerous indications in the play that the fairies are very small in size, for the spirit says that whenever Oberon and Titania meet, they quarrel vehemently so that: 


óall their elves for fear

Creep into acorn cups and hide them there.





óAct II, scene i, lines 30-31 


The best that can be done on the stage, of course, is to have the fairies played by children, and that is really quite small enough, for in The Merry Wives of Windsor children pretend to be fairies (see page I-446) and succeed in fooling one of the characters, who is not portrayed as wondering that fairies are so large. Shakespeare may deliberately have reduced the fairies in this play to minuscule size to add to the fantasy. 
Oberon and Titania, at least, give the appearance of being full-sized humans, if we consider what Shakespeare says of them. 


Ö Robin Goodfellow




By this time the Fairy has recognized the spirit to whom it has been speaking. It says: 


Either I mistake your shape and making quite,

Or else you are that shrewd and knavish sprite

Called Robin Goodfellow.





óAct II, scene i, lines 32-34 


The Fairy recites the mischievous deeds of Robin Goodfellow, but adds: 


Those that Hobgoblin call you, and sweet Puck,

You do their work, and they shall have good luck.





óAct II, scene i, lines 40-41 


Puck, a king of the elves in Scottish mythology, was pictured as an evil demon, to begin with. His role diminished with time to that of a mere mischief-maker and it is this role Shakespeare gives him. 
To avert the mischief, it was necessary to flatter him, to call him "sweet Puck" or use the euphemism "Goodfellow," with the friendly given name of "Robin" (of which "Hob" is the diminutive). 
The Germans had a kind of earthy, mischievous creature in their legends, who behaved much like Shakespeare's Puck, and who were called "kobolds." "Goblin" may be a form of that word, so that "hobgoblin" means "Robin the Kobold." (People were sufficiently fearful of Puck's knavishness to make "hobgoblin" become synonymous with a besetting fear.) 
Puck proudly admits his identity and describes himself as Oberon's jester, making the rather dour Fairy King laugh at the practical jokes the tricksy sprite plays on people.


Ö the shape of Corin Ö




Puck is scarcely finished when Oberon enters from one side and Titania from the other, each with their attendant elves. Both are angry at once and in no time at all are shrewishly raking up past infidelities. Titania says: 


Ö I know

When thou hast stolen away from fairy land

And in the shape of Corin sat all day,

Playing on pipes of corn, and versing love

To amorous Phyllida.





óAct II, scene i, lines 64-68 


It is not moderns only who long for a simpler past and who imagine a world of country joy and pastoral pleasures. The city folk of Shakespeare's time, and for that matter, those of ancient times, likewise turned away from what they conceived to be the corrupting influence of city life and longed for a magical land of shepherds and milkmaids ("Arcadia") that never really existed. 
Pastoral plays and poetry were a fad in Shakespeare's time and one conventional name for the shepherd-hero was Corin. Indeed, Shakespeare makes use of that name for a shepherd in his own pastoral play As You Like It (see page I-568). As for Phyllida, that is a version of "Phyllis," a traditional name for a pastoral heroine, and a good one too, since it means "leafy" in Greek. 
Titania accuses Oberon, further, of having arrived in Athens from India only to be at Theseus' wedding because he himself has been a past lover of Hippolyta. 
Accusations like these make us think of Oberon and Titania as full-sized. To be sure, they can take any shape they wish (Oberon made love to Phyllida "in the shape of Corin") but it is difficult to think of them being lovingly interested in coarse humans if they themselves are dainty enough to fit in an acorn cup. 


Ö Ariadne and Antiopa




Oberon, furious at Titania's scandalous allegations, accuses her in turn of being in love with Theseus and having caused him to betray earlier loves of whom she had been jealous. Oberon says:


Didst not thou lead him through the glimmering night

From Perigenia, whom he ravished?

And make him with fair

Aegles break his faith,

With Ariadne and Antiopa?




 -Act II, scene i, lines 77-80


These were women whom Theseus met in the course of his adventures. Thus, Perigenia was the daughter of Sinis, a wicked bandit who lived at the Corinthian Isthmus. Sinis would bend the tops of pine trees to the ground and tie some luckless traveler's right foot to one pine tree, and left-foot to the other. He would then release the trees, which would spring upright, tearing the traveler in two. 
Theseus wrestled with him and killed him, then discovered the bandit's daughter hiding in terror. She fell in love with him at once. Theseus had a child by her, but then gave her to one of his companions. 
Aegles and Antiopa are two other loves of Theseus. In fact, Antiopa (Antiope) is the name of the Amazonian Queen, for which Shakespeare substituted the name "Hippolyta." 
By all odds, the most famous of the forsaken maidens is Ariadne. She was the daughter of King Minos of Crete, who, when Theseus was a youth, held Athens under tribute, demanding seven youths and seven maidens each year. These were sacrificed to the Minotaur, a bull-headed monster. (This is a legendary memory of the time, prior to 1400 b.c., when Crete was the greatest naval power in the Mediterranean, and when bull worship was an important factor in its religion.) 
Theseus had himself selected as one of the seven youths and sailed to Crete to place an end to the tribute once and for all. 
The Minotaur was hidden in the center of a labyrinth so intricate that no one entering could expect to find his way out even if he were so fortunate as to kill the monster. (This may well have been a Grecian memory of the great palace at Knossos, the Cretan capital, which had so many rooms that the unsophisticated Greeks of the day must have wondered how anyone could find his way around within it.) 
Minos' daughter, Ariadne, having fallen in love with Theseus, gave him a magic ball of twine which would unwind before him, leading him to the Minotaur, and which he could then trace back for the return. Theseus followed the twine, killed the Minotaur, and returned. 
The Athenian had promised to make Ariadne his wife in return and when he left Crete, he took her with him. They landed on the Aegean island of Naxos and while she slept, Theseus and his party stole away and made for Athens without her. Why he deserted her the myths don't say, though Mary Renault has a fascinating conjecture concerning it in her novel The King Must Die. 


... angry winterÖ




Titania, womanlike, dismisses the charges scornfully as fantasies born of jealousy. She speaks bitterly of their quarreling as having caused the very seasons to have grown confused (a dear reflection of the role of the fairies as nature spirits): 


The spring, the summer,

The childing autumn, angry winter, change

Their wonted liveries; and the mazed world,

By their increase, now knows not which is which.





óAct II, scene i, lines 111-14 


The interest here lies in that some critics see this to be a contemporary reference. The years 1594-96 were horrible, from the standpoint of weather, in England, and if the play had been written in 1595, Shakespeare might have been referring to the weather at this time. 
Oberon points out that to end the quarreling, all that need be done is for Titania to give up the Indian changeling, but this Titania flatly refuses to do, and they part. 


Ö certain stars shot madly Ö




The chafed Oberon decides to teach Titania a lesson. He calls Puck to him and reminds him of a time they listened to a mermaid (see page 1-12) sing. Oberon says: 


Ö the rude sea grew civil at her song,

And certain stars shot madly from their spheres,

To hear the sea maid's music.





óAct II, scene i, lines 152-54 


This represents the romantic belief that even inanimate nature responds to beautiful music. This is most commonly aired in connection with Orpheus, the musician of Greek legend, and a beautiful song on that subject is to be found in Henry VIII. 
The Greeks supposed that the stars possessed a sphere of their own. The stars do not move relative to each other (they are "fixed stars" as opposed to the planets) and all were affixed to a single sphere, therefore. Shakespeare, however, mistakenly supposes each star to have its individual sphere and therefore says the stars shot madly from their "spheres." 
The thought that a star could leave its sphere arises from the sight of "shooting stars," which are not stars at all, of course, but fragments of matter, often no larger than a pinhead, which in their travels about the sun collide with the earth and are heated to white brilliance by friction with the air.


Ö a fair vestalÖ




Oberon goes on: 


That very time I saw, but thou couldst not,

Flying between the cold moon and the earth,

Cupid all armed. A certain aim he took

At a fair vestal throned by the west,





óAct II, scene i, lines 155-58 


But Cupid's arrow, for a wonder, missed: 


And the imperial vot'ress passed on,

In maiden meditation, fancy-free.





óAct II, scene i, lines 163-64 


Vesta was the Roman goddess of the hearth; that is, of the household fire. The six priestesses in her service had, as their chief duty, the guarding of a sacred flame which must never be allowed to go out. This is perhaps a memory of a time when the art of lighting a fire at will was new and difficult, and when the loss of a household fire meant an uncomfortable period of cold and uncooked food. (It would be something like a breakdown in electric service these days.) 
The priestesses were required to be virgins and to maintain an absolute chastity on pain of torture and death, and it is recorded that in eleven hundred years only twenty cases of violation of that rule were recorded. 
The Vestal Virgins were venerated and had many privileges, taking precedence even over the Emperor on certain ceremonial occasions. The term "vestal" has come to be synonymous with "virgin" in the English language because of them. 
Shakespeare's reference to the "fair vestal throned by the west" can be to none other than to Elizabeth I who, at the time the play was written had been reigning thirty-seven years, was sixty-two years old, and had never married. Non-marriage need not necessarily be equated with virginity, of course, and Elizabeth had had several favorites (including the Earl of Essex at the time the play was written) but her subjects accepted her virginity as fact. 
In the early years of her reign, her failure to marry was of great concern to her advisers, for children were required if the succession was to be made sure. As the years passed and she grew too old to have children anyway, the best had to be made of it, and Elizabeth's reputed virginity became a source of pride. She became known as the "Virgin Queen," and when in the 1580s the first English settlers attempted to found colonies on what is now the east-central shore of the United States, they named the region "Virginia" in her honor. 
Shakespeare's delicate picture of Elizabeth as a "fair vestal" whom not even "Cupid all armed" could defeat and who remained "in maiden meditation, fancy-free" must surely have pleased the aged Queen, who had always been terribly vain of her good looks, and who insisted on being treated as a beauty even after she had long ceased to be one. The terrible anachronism of placing her in the reign of Theseus would bother no one. 


Ö a girdle round about the earth




Cupid's arrow, which misses the fair vestal, hits a flower which Oberon describes as: 


Before milk-white, now purple with love's wound,

And maidens call it love-in-idleness.





óAct II, scene i, lines 167-68 


The flower referred to is more commonly spoken of nowadays as the pansy. Oberon orders Puck to: 


Fetch me this herb, and be thou here again

Ere the leviathan can swim a league.





óAct II, scene i, lines 173-74 


It is foolish, of course, to try to attach literal meaning to what is obviously poetic hyperbole, but-just for fun-"leviathan" is the whale, which can swim as speedily as twenty miles an hour. To swim a league (three miles) would require nine minutes. 
Puck answers: 


/'// put a girdle round about the earth

In forty minutes.





óAct II, scene i, lines 175-76 


It is interesting to note that Puck outdoes even the modern astronaut, who requires ninety minutes to go around the earth. To circumnavigate the planet in forty minutes means moving at the rate of 37,500 miles an hour or a little over 10 miles a second. Puck would be hard put to manage to stay close to the earth's surface at this speed, for he would well exceed the escape velocity. 
However, Shakespeare was writing a century before Newton had worked out the law of gravity, and, in any case, we can assume that such mundane universal laws of the universe would not apply to Puck. 
In the nine minutes allowed him by Oberon, by the way, Puck could, at this speed, flash to a point twenty-seven hundred miles away and back again. In short, he could fly from Athens to England and back with several minutes to spare, and it must have been in England that Oberon saw Cupid aiming at the fair vestal. -So through all the fantasy, Shakespeare manages (without meaning it, I'm sure) to allow Puck enough time. 
Oberon plans to use the juice of the plant he has sent Puck for as a love philter. It will serve to make Titania fall in love with something abhorrent, and thus Oberon will have his revenge. 


Ö you hardhearted adamant




At this point, Demetrius (warned by Helena of the lovers' flight) comes upon the scene in search of Lysander and Hermia, intent on killing the former and dragging the latter back to Athens. Helena tags after him, although Demetrius, utterly ungrateful for her help, does his best to drive her away. But poor Helena cries out: 


You draw me, you hardhearted adamant;

But yet you draw not iron, for my heart

Is true as steel.





óAct II , scene i, lines 195-97


The word "adamant" is from a Greek expression meaning "not tamed." It was applied to a mythical substance that was so hard it could not be cut or broken and in that sense could not be tamed. The word has been applied to the hardest naturally occurring substance; that is, to diamond, and, as a matter of fact, "diamond" is a corruption of "adamant." 
In the Middle Ages "adamant" was falsely related to the Lathi expression "adamare," meaning "to attract," so that it came to be applied to the magnet. Helena cleverly uses the word in both senses at once, for Deme-trius attracts her as though he were a magnet and his cruel heart is diamond-hard. 


Apollo flies Ö




Demetrius desperately tries to escape her importunities, and Helena, still pursuing him, says sadly: 


Apollo flies, and Daphne holds the chase;




óAct II, scene i, line 231


Daphne was a nymph, daughter of the Peneus River (which cuts across Thessaly in northern Greece). Apollo fell in love with her and when she refused him, he tried to rape her. She fled and Apollo ran after. Even as his hands were clutching at her shoulder, she prayed to the earth goddess, who changed her into a laurel tree. 
To Helena, it seems that the old myth reverses itself in her case. Oberon, overhearing, pities her. He decides to use the love juice for Demetrius as well as for Titania. In this way do the fairy plot and the lovers plot intertwine. 
Oberon does not count, however, on a second pair of Athenians creeping through the fairy-haunted wood. Lysander and Hermia, coming on stage, are overcome by weariness and lie down to sleep. Puck, returning with the love juice, is told by Oberon to anoint the eyes of an Athenian youth in the woods. Puck finds Lysander and Hermia sleeping, assumes Lysander is the youth meant by Oberon, and places the juice on his eyes. 
Next comes Demetrius running through, outdistancing the panting Helena. Helena, who can run no more, finds Hermia and Lysander sleeping, wonders if they are dead, and wakes Lysander. He sees Helena through his juice-moistened eyes and falls madly in love with her immediately. 
Helena assumes she is being mocked and runs away. Lysander pursues her and Hermia wakes to find herself alone. 


... a bush of thorns. ..




Meanwhile, in that spot of the woods where Titania lies sleeping (hav-ng earlier been lulled to sleep by a fairy-sung lullaby), the Athenian laborers come blundering in to work out the production problems of Pyramus and Thisbe. 
Those problems are many and difficult to their unsophisticated minds. Bottom points out, for instance, that when Pyramus draws a sword to kill himself, he will frighten the ladies in the audience. What's more, introduc-ing a lion will frighten them even more. It will be necessary, Bottom ex-plains, to have a prologue written that will explain that no harm is intended, hat the lion is not a real one, and so on. 
There is next the question of moonlight. Will there be a moon that night? Quince checks the almanac and says: 


Yes, it doth shine that night.




óAct III, scene i, line 55


This is odd, since the play is to be given at Theseus' wedding and Theseus himself has said it will take place on the night of the new moon, which means there will be no moon in the sky. 
But it really doesn't matter. Even if there is no moon to shine naturally upon the stage, Quince has an alternative. 


Ö one must come in with a bush of thorns and a lantern,

and say he comes to disfigure,

or to present, the person of Moonshine.





óAct III, scene i, lines 59-61 


A man holding a lantern on high is an obvious representation of the moon. But why a bush of thorns? 
The vague shadows on the moon's face, visible to the naked eye, are the marks of the "seas," relatively flat circular areas surrounded by the lighter cratered and mountainous areas. In the days before telescopes, the nature of the markings could not be known and an imaginative peasantry concerted the shadows into figures; most commonly the figure of a man. This was the "man in the moon." 
Somehow the feeling arose that the man in the moon had been hurled there as a punishment and the particular crime was thought to have been described in the Bible. The crime took place when the Israelites were wandering in the wilderness on their way to the Promised Land. "And while the children of Israel were in the wilderness, they found a man that gathered sticks upon the sabbath day. And they that found him gathering sticks brought him unto Moses and Aaron" (Numbers 15:32-33). 
It is clearly stated that this sabbath breaker was stoned to death. Nevertheless, an alternate non-biblical version of his punishment arose and grew popular. This was that for breaking the sabbath he was exiled to the moon with the sticks he had gathered. The sticks gradually elaborated into a thornbush and a dog was often added too (either as a merciful gesture of company for the man or as an unmerciful representation of the devil, who forever torments him). When in the final act of A Midsummer Night's Dream the little play is actually put on at Theseus' wedding, the dog appears with Starveling the Tailor, who plays Moonshine. 


Ö at Ninny's tomb




Puck enters, having taken care (as he supposes) of Demetrius, and now all ready to place the love juice on Titania's eyes. He finds, to his amazement, the rehearsal in progress. Bottom (as Pyramus) delivers his lines and exits, while Flute (as Thisbe) calls after him:


I'll meet thee, Pyramus, at Ninny's tomb.





óAct III, scene i, line 98 


"Ninny's tomb" is Flute's mangling of "Ninus' tomb." Ninus, according to Greek legend, was the founder of the Assyrian Empire and the builder of Nineveh, its capital, which, as was thought, was named after him. Since the tale of Pyramus and Thisbe takes place in Babylon, which was an important part of the Assyrian Empire, a mention of Ninus' tomb is useful local color. 
The Greek versions of Assyrian history are, of course, completely distorted. There was no historical character such as Ninus. There was, however, an early Assyrian conqueror, Tukulti-Ninurta I, who reigned about the time of the Trojan War. His fame may have dimly reached across Asia Minor, and his long name could have been shortened to the first half of the second part, with a final s (which ended almost all Greek names) added.


Ö make an ass of me Ö






The mischievous Puck sees his chance to improve on the instructions given him by Oberon. He follows Pyramus offstage and works a charm that places an ass's head on his shoulders. When Bottom returns, unaware of the change, he finds that his frightened companions take one look at him and flee. Their cries to the effect that he is monstrously changed leave him puzzled. Finally, he says:


/ see their knavery.

This is to make an ass of me; to fright me, if they could.





óAct III, scene i, lines 121-22 


Bottom, who, figuratively speaking, has proved himself all through the play to have an ass's head, now owns one literally; and he is as unaware of his literal ass's head now as he had been of his figurative one earlier. 
But he remains lovable in his folly even now. Titania, who has had the juice placed on her eyes, wakes at this moment and at once falls in love with Bottom in his grotesque disguise. She places her retinue of tiny fairies at his disposal, and Bottom, taking it all as his due, allows himself, most complacently, to be worshiped and adored. 
Ö the gun's report Delighted, Puck races to report the event to Oberon. He describes the scene when Bottom returns with his ass's head and the other workmen scatter and fly: 


As wild geese that the creeping fowler eye,

Or russet-pated choughs, many in sort,

Rising and cawing at the gun's report,





óAct III, scene ii, lines 20-22 


Either Puck can foresee the future with remarkable clarity or this is a particularly amusing anachronism-guns in the time of Theseus.


Ö th'Antipodes






Oberon is pleased, but asks about the Athenian lovers, and Puck says he has taken care of that too.
But in comes Demetrius. He has found Hermia, who is berating him bitterly for having killed Lysander. Only Lysander's death could explain his having left her while asleep. She would not for one moment accept the possibility that he had crept away from her willingly: 


/'// believe as soon

This whole earth may be bored, and that the moon

May through the center creep, and so displease

Her brother's noontide with th'Antipodes.





óAct III, scene ii, lines 52-55 


The ancient Greeks were the first to realize that the earth was spherical in shape. (To be sure, they were not the Greeks of Theseus' time. The first who thought so lived seven and a half centuries after Theseus.) They realized that people who lived on the other side of the globe from themselves would have their feet pointing upward, so to speak, in the direction opposite from that in which their" own feet pointed. 
The people on the other side of the globe would therefore be "antipodes" ("opposite-feet"). The name was applied to the other side of the globe itself as a result. 


Ö the Tartar's bow




Demetrius desperately denies having killed Lysander, but Hermia scolds him fiercely and leaves. Demetrius, wearied, lies down to sleep. Oberon, seeing Puck's mistake, sends him angrily after Helena so that the mistake can be corrected. Puck, eager to calm his angry king, says:


/ go, I go; look how 1 go,

Swifter than arrow from the Tartar's bow.





óAct III, scene ii, lines 100-1 


Europe, through its ancient and medieval history, has been periodically plagued by nomadic horsemen thundering west from the steppes of central Asia. The Cimmerians, Scythians, Sarmatians, Huns, Avars, and Magyars each in turn terrorized European territories. The nomads won their victories through superior mobility; through the dash of their swift and hardy horses, from whose backs the riders shot arrows that galled their slower-moving European adversaries. 
The last and most terrible of the nomadic invaders were the Tatars or Mongols, who in the first half of the thirteenth century conquered both China and Russia. In 1240 the speeding Mongol horsemen darted into central Europe, smashing every clumsy army of armored knights that was raised to stop them, and spreading ruin and desolation almost to the Adriatic. 
Far back in central Asia their ruler died and all the Mongol armies (undefeated) swept back to take part in the decision as to the succession. In 1241, therefore, the Mongols left and, as it happened, never returned. 
The Europeans, however, were long to remember the dreadful period of 1240-41. They called the horsemen Tartars, rather than Tatars, thinking of them not as men but as demons from Tartarus (see page 1-13). The Tartars' arrows remained in mind and Shakespeare could use them as a metaphor for speed (even though they had entered European consciousness twenty-five centuries after the time of Theseus). 


Ö high Taurus' snow




Oberon places the juice on Demetrius' eyes and Puck brings back Helena as ordered. With Helena, however, is Lysander, still under the influence of the juice and still pleading love. Helena persists in thinking Lysander is making cruel fun of her. The noise they make wakes Demetrius, who is now also in love with Helena. 
Demetrius addresses her in the most elaborate lover's fashion, saying: 


That pure congealed white, high Taurus' snow,

Fanned with the eastern wind, turns to a crow

When thou hold'st up thy hand:

O, let me kiss This princess of pure whiteÖ





óAct III, scene ii, lines 141-44 


Helena is obviously a fair-skinned blonde, which in medieval times rep resented an ideal of beauty. Her skin is whiter than the snows of the Taurus Mountains, a range in southeastern Asia Minor.
When the German tribes tore the western provinces of the Roman Empire apart, they established themselves as an aristocracy over a Celto-Roman peasantry. The Germans were taller than the Celto-Romans on the average, and faker. Over the centuries, therefore, fair skin, blond hah-, blue eyes, and tall stature came to be associated with aristocracy and beauty; the reverse with peasanthood and ugliness. 
Helena, completely confused, decides that both men have combined for some insane reason to make fun of her. Then, when Hermia enters and acts astonished, Helena maintains that her old girlfriend has also joined in the joke. 


Ö you Ethiope




Poor Hermia can make nothing of what is going on. All she knows is that she has found Lysander again, but that Lysander is acting most peculiarly. She approaches Lysander timidly to find out what it is all about, but the erstwhile tender lover turns on the poor girl savagely and says: 


Away, you Ethiope!





óAct III, scene ii, line 257 


The expression "Ethiopian" is from Greek words meaning "burnt faces"-faces that have been darkened by exposure to the sun. It was applied to the races living south of Egypt and was eventually used for African blacks generally. 
Here, then, the same principle that brings about praise for Helena's fair beauty brings contempt for poor Hermia's darker complexion. 
Hermia has trouble understanding this, but when she does she leaps at once to the conclusion that Helena has stolen her love. She cries out furiously about Helena: 


Now I perceive that she hath made compare

Between our statures; she hath urged her height,

And with her personage, her tall personage,

Her height, forsooth, she hath prevailed with hint.





óAct III, scene ii, lines 290-93 


She advances upon Helena, nails unsheathed, and Helena fearfully shrinks away as both men vie in protecting her. 
The exasperated Hermia accepts every remark as a reference to her plebeian shortness and Lysander, sensing her sensitivity, throws the fact of it in her face, saying:


Get you gone, you dwarf;

You minimus, of hind'ring knotgrass made;

You bead, you acorn!





óAct III, scene ii, lines 328-30 


Knotgrass, a common weed, was supposed to stunt growth if eaten. 
Lysander and Demetrius, angered with each other over their common love for Helena, as earlier they had been over their common love for Hermia, stride offstage to fight. At this, Helena, left alone with Hermia, flees, and Hermia follows. 


Ö as black as Acheron




Oberon is terribly irritated and virtually accuses Puck of having done all this deliberately. Puck denies having done it on purpose, though he admits the results have turned out fun. 
Oberon orders him to begin mending matters: 


Ö Robin, overcast the night.

The starry welkin cover thou anon

With drooping fog, as black as Acheron;

And lead these testy rivals so astray,

As one comes not within another's way.





óAct III, scene ii, lines 355-59 


Acheron is the name of one of the five rivers which the classical writers described as encircling the underworld. For some reason, the name of this particular river came to be applied to the underworld generally, so that "Acheron" came to be a synonym for "Hades." 
Once the night is made dark, Puck is to mislead Lysander and Demetrius, weary them to sleep once more, rearrange their affections, entice them into considering it all a dream, and send all four safely back to Athens. 


Ö Aurora's harbinger




Puck agrees, but urges haste: 


For night's swift dragons cut the clouds full fast,

And yonder shines Aurora's harbinger;





óAct HI, scene ii, lines 379-80 


Aurora (known to the Greeks as Eos) is the goddess of the dawn. She is the third child of the Titan Hyperion (see page I-ll), a sister of Helios, god of the sun, and Selene, goddess of the moon.
Her harbinger is the planet Venus, shining as the morning star and rising only an hour or two before the sun and therefore not long before the dawn. 
Oberon agrees and Puck accomplishes the task, sending all four Athenians into a scrambling confusion that wearies them to sleep once more. He then anoints Lysander's eyes in such a way that when all four awake, all shall be straightened out. Or, as Puck says: 


Jack shall have Jill;

Nought shall go ill;

The man shall have his mare again, and all shall be well.





óAct III, scene ii, lines 461-63 


"Jack and Jill" is a stock phrase for a man and his sweetheart or wife. Jack is clearly a generic name for a man generally, since it is so common (a diminutive of Jacob, which in one form or another-James in England, Hamish in Scotland, Jacques in France, lago or Diego in Spam and Portugal, and Giacopo in Italy-was an extremely popular name all over western Europe). 
Jill is far less common and is usually considered a short version of Juliana. It was used, probably, because a one-syllabled girl's name starting with the J sound was needed, though it seems to me that Joan would have been more fitting. In any case, we ourselves know Jack and Jill primarily from the nursery rhyme that sends them to the top of a hill to fetch a pail of water. 
Nor is this the only complication unraveled. Oberon meets Titania, who, in her entranced adoration of the ass-headed Bottom, freely gives up her Indian boy. She then has Bottom sleep with his long-eared head in her lap, and Oberon finally takes pity on her. He releases her from her spell and orders Puck to remove the ass's head from Bottom and send him back to Athens too. 
And so at last are Oberon and Titania reconciled. 


Ö with Hercules and CadmusÖ




Now that the complications of the subplots are solved, Theseus and Hippolyta come on the scene again. They are following the hunt and Hippolyta says, in reminiscence: 


/ was with Hercules and Cadmus once,

When in a wood of Crete they bayed the bear

With hounds of Sparta.





óAct IV, scene i, lines 115-17


The world of orthodox Greek myth comes swimming back. Hercules was indeed a contemporary of Theseus and the two are made companions in several myths. 
Cadmus, in the legends, was a Phoenician prince. He had come to Greece in search of Europa, his sister. She had been kidnapped by Zeus in the shape of a bull and brought to Crete, where Minos was to reign and the Minotaur was to be found. As a matter of fact, Minos was the son of Europa. 
Cadmus never found Europa (so that it isn't quite right to place him in Crete). Wandering in Greece itself, he founded the city of Thebes. The Greek legend has it that it was Cadmus who taught the letters of the alphabet to the Greeks. This is interesting since the alphabet did, in actual fact, originate with the Phoenicians and it is entirely appropriate that the Greeks be taught it by Cadmus, a Phoenician prince. 
Sparta is mentioned in this passage too. In Theseus' time it was a city in southern Greece that was not particularly remarkable, though it was soon to become the home of Helen, whose beauty sparked the Trojan War. In later centuries Sparta was to become the most militarized and, for a time, the most militarily successful of the Greek cities. 


Ö Thessalian bulls




Theseus says that his own hounds are of the same breed as the "hounds of Sparta" Hippolyta has mentioned: 


Ö their heads are hung

With ears that sweep away the morning dew;

Crook-kneed, and dew-lapped like Thessalian bulls;





óAct IV, scene i, lines 123-25 


Thessaly is a fertile plain region in northeastern Greece, much different from the rocky, mountainous area to the south where Greece's most famous cities, including Athens, Sparta, Thebes, and Corinth, were located. It would be naturally a place where horses would be useful and where cattle would be profitably bred. A Thessalian bull would be larger and better than a bull bred elsewhere in Greece. 


The rite of May




In the wood, the hunting party, which includes Egeus, the father of Hermia, comes upon the four young people, still sleeping where Puck had left them.
Egeus frowns and begins to ponder on the meaning, but Theseus, depicted throughout the play as courtly and kind, quickly places a harmless interpretation on the matter. He says: 


No doubt they rose up early to observe

The rite of May;





óAct IV, scene i, lines 135-36 


May Day, the first of May, was a day of nature celebration in ancient times. Spring was definitely established by then; the greenery was growing; it was warm enough to spend the evening outdoors. It was a time for revelry and youth, and no doubt a time when the fertility of nature might best be imitated by the celebrants. 
The Maypole about which the young people danced may well be what was left of a phallic symbol. Indeed, earlier in the play, Hermia had made use of just such an implication, perhaps. When she was terribly irritated at being scorned for her shortness, she turned on Helena and said, 


How low am I, thou painted maypole? Speak!





óAct III, scene ii, line 296 


Not only does Hermia in this way refer disparagingly to Helena as tall and skinny (and perhaps with as little figure as a maypole), but she also implies that the men, Lysander and Demetrius, are dancing about her with immoral intent. 
Theseus' reference places the play well before Midsummer Day, by the way. 


Ö Saint Valentine Ö




Perhaps Theseus is not unaware of the coarser ways of celebrating May Day, for as the hunting horns sound and the Athenian lovers rouse themselves, Theseus says, with light mockery: 


Good morrow, friends. Saint Valentine is past:

Begin these wood birds but to couple now?





óAct IV, scene i, lines 142-43 


St. Valentine's Day is certainly past, for, as we all know, it falls on February 14. Valentine's Day commemorates the martyred death of St. Valentine on February 14, 270 (which makes it a terribly anachronistic comment in the mouth of Theseus)., The romantic symbolism of the day antedated the good saint. There is a folk belief that the birds began to mate on this day (which is what Theseus is referring to) and this may have initiated fertility rites in pagan days. The Church would attempt to transfer the rites to a Christian commemoration and soften them too, and the story arose that St. Valentine made anonymous gifts of money to help poor girls to a dowry that would find them husbands. Thus, he became the patron saint of romantic love. 
The ferocious Egeus, hearing Lysander confess he had intended to elope with Hermia, calls for his death and the marriage of Hermia to Demetrius. Demetrius, however, confesses that he now loves Helena. Theseus, listening politely, decides that each loving pair is now to be married, Lysander to Hermia, and Demetrius to Helena. 
Meanwhile Bottom also rouses himself, finds his natural head restored, dismisses his vague memories as a dream, and returns to Athens and to his mourning comrades. They are delighted to meet him and continue to prepare their play. 


"The battle with the CentaursÖ"




The time of the wedding of Theseus and Hippolyta is now at hand. Theseus has heard of the events of the magic night in the woods and dismisses them as fantasy. He turns to the list of entertainments proposed for the wedding feast and reads off the first item: 


"The battle with the Centaurs, to be sung

By an Athenian eunuch to the harp."

We'll none of that. That have I told my love,

In glory of my kinsman Hercules.





óAct V, scene i, lines 44-47 


Centaurs were common monsters of Greek myths, composite creatures with the head and torso of men affixed to the body of a horse. They were supposed to have been natives of Thessaly. Perhaps the notion originated with the first sight of men riding horses. The southern Greeks, in their narrow valleys, having been unused to horses for generations, would find men on horseback in the plains of Thessaly when they marched northward in battle and tales of centaurs would drift back to stay-at-homes. 
The centaurs were considered to be barbaric creatures of the senses, given to gross eating, to drunkenness and lechery. The chief tale in which centaurs are prominent involves the marriage of Pirithous, a friend of Theseus (he does not appear in this play but he has a minor role in The Two Noble Kinsmen, see page I-56). 
Pirithous, who was of the Thessalian tribe of the Lapiths, invited his kinsmen and friends to the wedding, Theseus among them. He also invited a party of centaurs. The centaurs, however, drank too much and, in a drunken fury, created a disturbance and tried to carry off the bride. At once a fight broke out and the Lapiths, with Theseus' stanch help, drove off the centaurs, killing many. 
It could not be this tale that was to be sung by the eunuch, for Hercules is not involved and Theseus refers to a battle with centaurs that redounded to Hercules' honor. But then, Hercules had several encounters with centaurs and won every battle. 
Theseus here and in The Two Noble Kinsmen (see page I-58) refers to "my kinsman Hercules." They were both great-grandchildren, through their mothers, of Tantalus (see page I-13). 


Ö the tipsy Bacchanals




A second item on the list is: 


"The riot of the tipsy Bacchanals,

Tearing the Thracian singer in their rage."





óAct V, scene i, lines 48-49 


The Thracian singer was Orpheus, who played the lyre and sang so beautifully that wild beasts were calmed and the very trees and rocks left their place to follow him. He married Eurydice, whom he deeply loved, and when she was bitten by a snake and died, he descended into the underworld to reclaim her. So beautiful was his music that he even touched the cold heart of Hades, who agreed to let him take Eurydice back, provided he didn't turn to look at her till he was out of the underworld. 
They were almost out, the light of day was ahead, when Orpheus, suddenly fearful that he was being tricked by a counterfeit, turned to look and Eurydice slipped forever away from him. 
He emerged to wander about inconsolably. He met a group of bacchanals, women engaged in the wild and drunken rites that celebrated Bacchus, god of the vine. When Orpheus seemed oblivious to them, they interpreted his sad silence as scorn. They tore him apart and threw his head into the river. It floated down to the sea, still singing as it went. 


Ö / from Thebes.. .




Theseus gives his opinion of the Orpheus item curtly: 


That is an old device; and it was played

When 1 from Thebes came last a conqueror.





óAct V, scene i, lines 50-51


The myths do contain accounts of a victorious war fought against Thebes by Theseus. As a matter of fact, that war plays an important part in The Two Noble Kinsmen (see page I-59) where it is fought immediately before the wedding. 


"The thrice three Muses Ö"







A third item is: 


"The thrice three Muses mourning for the death

Of Learning, late deceased in beggary."





óAct V, scene i, lines 52-53 


Theseus dismisses that as a satire too sharp to fit a wedding ceremony. 
The nine Muses ("thrice three") were daughters of Jupiter (Zeus) who were the goddesses of the various branches of learning. 
Some critics have tried to pick out some particular person meant by "Learning" in this passage. It is suggested, for instance, that the reference is to the death of the Italian poet Torquato Tasso, who died in 1595. 
However, it seems most likely that Shakespeare is merely poking fun at the chronic complaints in his time (and in ours, for that matter) that everything is going to the devil, that the great feats of the past will never be equaled, and that the public taste is degenerating. To show that this was felt even in Theseus' time would be amusing. 
But then Theseus' eye catches the notice of the play about Pyramus and Thisbe, and though the master of the revels snobbishly dismisses it as the pathetic attempt of ignorant workers and Hippolyta expresses her nervousness over their possible failure, Theseus nobly indicates he will hear it and that nothing can be a failure if it is presented with honest good will and out of a sense of duty. 


Ö like Limander Ö




Now Bottom and company present their play, which, in the actual practice, turns out to be lamer and more ridiculous than even the rehearsals had prepared us for. They mangle classical references, as when Bottom (Pyramus) says: 


And, like Limander, am I trusty still.





óAct V, scene i, line 197


Flute (Thisbe) replies to this: 


And I like Helen, till the Fates me kill.





óAct V, scene i, line 198 


There is no "Limander" anywhere in the corpus of Greek legends. If Flute really means "Helen," that must be the famous Helen of Troy, that paragon of beauty who was the cause of the Trojan War (see page I-76). In that case, Limander must mean Alexander, which is one of the alternate names for Paris, who eloped with her. 
On the other hand, it is more likely that by Limander, Bottom meant Leander, the well-known hero of the romantic tale of a lover who nightly swam the Hellespont to be with his love and who, one stormy night, drowned in the attempt. In that case the girl would be Hero, not Helen. 


Ö Shafalus to Procrus.. .




Bottom (Pyramus) also protests: 


Not Shafalus to Procrus was so true,





óAct V, scene i, line 199 


This is a mangling of Cephalus and Procris, a rather affecting myth about a loving husband and wife. Cephalus, an ardent hunter, had a spear that never missed. He went out hunting early every morning and finally Procris decided to follow him to see if he might not be meeting another woman. Cephalus, heated with hunting, rested and called on the breeze to cool him. Procris, imagining he was calling a woman, sprang from her hiding place and Cephalus, in reflex action, threw his never-missing spear and killed her. 


O Sisters Three




The Play of Pyramus and Thisbe ends with a pair of the most terrific death scenes ever seen as first Pyramus and then Thisbe commit elaborate suicide. Thisbe cries out in her turn: 


O Sisters Three,

Come, come to me,

With hands as pale as milk;

Lay them in gore,

Since you have shore

With shears his thread of silk.





óAct V, scene i, lines 338-43 


The "Sisters Three" are the Fates, who govern all events and whose edicts neither gods nor men can defy. There are three of them by the natural division of time into past, present, and future. 
Clotho represents the past and she spins the thread of life, causing life to originate and an individual to be born. Lachesis guides the thread, representing the present and its events. Dreadful Atropos is the future, for she carries the shears with which she snips the thread and brings death. 
The three Fates play a much more serious part in Macbeth (see page I-160). 


Ö the triple Hecate's team




The play within a play ends with a dance and with its audience amused and ready for bed. 
Nothing remains but the final bit of entertainment, supplied by the fairy band. Puck comes on the stage alone to say that with the coming of night once more the fairies are back: 


Ö we fairies, that do run

By the triple Hecate's team,

From the presence of the sun,

Following darkness like a dream,

Now are frolic.





óAct V, scene i, lines 385-89 


Hecate was supposed to be one of the Titanesses in Greek mythology, but in the struggle that resulted in their supplanting by Jupiter (Zeus) and the other later gods, Hecate sided with Jupiter and remained in power. She was probably another personification of the moon. 
There were three common goddesses of the moon in the later myths: Phoebe, Diana (Artemis), and Hecate. All three might be combined as the "triple Hecate" and Hecate was therefore frequently portrayed with three faces and six arms. 
Later mythologists also tried to rationalize the difference in names by saying that Phoebe was the moon goddess in the heavens, Diana on earth, and Hecate in the underworld. 
This connection with the underworld tended to debase her and make her a goddess of enchantments and magic spells, so that the fairies in following "triple Hecate's team" were following not only the pale team of horses that guided the moon's chariot (hence were active at night rather than by day) but also shared her power of enchantment and magic. 
Her enchantments and magic made her sink further in Christian times until Hecate finally became a kind of queen of witches, and she appears in this guise in Macbeth (see page II-185). 
Now in come Oberon and Titania with the rest of their fairies. They make their concluding pretty speeches, placing a good luck charm on all the couples being married in the play (and perhaps on the couple being married in the audience, if A Midsummer Night's Dream was performed to celebrate a marriage). Puck then delivers the epilogue and the play is over. 
Nothing in the play indicates a tragic end to the love tale of Theseus and Hippolyta, and though it seems a shame to mention it after such a happy time, I will. 
The Amazons, offended at Theseus' kidnapping of their queen, mounted an attack against him. They were defeated, but Hippolyta, fighting Amazonlike at the side of her husband, and against her own subjects of the past, was killed. 








3. The Two Noble Kinsmen


In 1613, at the very end of his career, Shakespeare collaborated with John Fletcher in writing two plays. 
Fletcher was fifteen years Shakespeare's junior and between 1606 and 1625 (he died in the latter year) he wrote, alone or in collaboration, some fifty plays. The most notable of these were with Francis Beaumont, so that "Beaumont and Fletcher" is almost a single word in the history of English literature. 
The Shakespeare-Fletcher collaborations have all but vanished, as such. One of them, Henry VIII is generally included in editions of Shakespeare's collected works and is presented as solely by him, with no mention of Fletcher. The other collaboration, The Two Noble Kinsmen, is treated quite the reverse. It is generally omitted from Shakespeare's collected works. 
Recent scholarship, however, seems to make it reasonably certain that Shakespeare wrote a major part of it, and it is included as one of the volumes of the Signet Classic Shakespeare. The authorship is given as by "William Shakespeare and John Fletcher." 


Chaucer, of all admiredÖ




The play begins with a Prologue (probably written by Fletcher) which gives the source of the content of the drama. Shakespeare had done this once before in connection with Pericles (see page I-181), written some five years earlier. 
One cannot help wondering if this sort of thing isn't a sign of a certain insecurity on the part of the playwright. Uncertain as to the worth of the play, does he call on the name of a revered ancient as a shield against criticism? 
Thus, the Prologue, hoping (rather timorously) that the play meets approval, says:


It has a noble breeder, and a pure,

A learned, and a poet never went

More famous yet 'twixt Po and silver Trent.

Chaucer, of all admired, the story gives:





óProlog, lines 10-13 


Geoffrey Chaucer was born about 1340 and died in 1400. He was at the peak of his fame during the reign of Richard II (see Richard II). His wife was a lady in waiting to the second wife of John of Gaunt, an uncle of Richard II and an important character in the play of that name. What's more, she was sister to John of Gaunt's third wife. 
Chaucer is widely considered the first great writer in English (as opposed to the older Anglo-Saxon or Norman-French languages) and as the father of English literature. Placing him among the most prominent poets of western Europe (between the Po River in northern Italy and the Trent River in central England) is not an undue exaggeration. 
Chaucer's masterpiece is the Canterbury Tales, published in the last decade of his life. This pictured a group of twenty-nine varied individuals, united in the accident that all were on a pilgrimage to Canterbury. They planned to amuse themselves on the way by each telling (according to the original plan) two stories, making fifty-eight in all. Only twenty-three stories actually appear, so that less than half the original plan was carried through, but what exists is still splendid because of the wide variety in content and style and because of the interesting characterization of each pilgrim, both in description and in the story he or she chooses to tell. 
One of the pilgrims was a knight, and his tale was the first to be told. This "Knight's Tale," which serves as the source of The Two Noble Kinsmen is itself taken from the poem La Teseida of Giovanni Boccaccio. 
It is a tale of courtly love, treating with seriousness that artificial game of man and woman popularized by the troubadours of southern France in the time of the Crusades. By the conventions of courtly love, a woman was treated in a semifeudal, semireligious manner, with the lover serving her as both a vassal and a worshiper. The lover had to fulfill every whim of his mistress and suffer the extremes of emotion in a manner that had little if any relation to real life, but has affected storybook romance down to our own day. Such love could not exist in marriage but, according to convention, had to face insuperable barriers, such as the marriage of the mistress to someone else. Courtly love was mock passion, mock heroics, mock poetry, with nothing real but the noise it made. 
Near the beginning of his career as a playwright, Shakespeare satirized courtly love rather amusingly in his Love's Labor's Lost (see page I-437). (It was far more effectively blasted in the great Spanish novel Don Quixote de la Mancha by Miguel de Cervantes, the first part of which appeared in 1605. The love of Don Quixote for Dulcinea del Toboso reduced the conventions of courtly love to ridicule once and for all.) 
In The Two Noble Kinsmen Shakespeare and Fletcher treat courtly love seriously, but so lost are its conventions to us of the twentieth century that we cannot-even when Shakespeare asks us to. And at that, perhaps Shakespeare didn't try very hard to win us over. Those portions of the play which he wrote seem to have been pageantlike in nature. Shakespeare was writing "spectacle." 
Than Robin Hood 
The pageantry and spectacle of the play may even have been forced upon it by the pressure of having to live up to its Chaucerian source (like a modern trying to make a musical out of a Shakespearean play). At least, Fletcher, in the Prologue, begs the audience not to hiss lest Chaucer turn in his grave and say: 


"O fan

From me the witless chaff of such a writer

That blasts my bays and my famed works makes lighter

Than Robin Hood!"





óProlog, lines 18-21 


That great folk hero, Robin Hood, was known to the English public through a series of popular ballads which first appear (as far as modern knowledge is concerned) in Chaucer's lifetime. These ballads were enormously popular but as serious poetry were quite insignificant. They were analogous, in a way, to our own enormously popular but literarily insignificant TV westerns. 


Ö child of Ver




The play opens with a scene which is thought to be Shakespearean. 
Hymen enters. He is the Greek god of marriage, and is a mere personification concerning whom there are no well-known myths. Following Hymen are a variety of nymphs and then a wedding party-a groom, a bride, the groom's friend, the bride's sister. Everything is joyous and springlike and the first words of the play are a song about early flowers: 


Primrose, first-born child of Ver,

Merry spring-time's harbinger,





óAct I, scene i, lines 7-8 


"Ver" is an obsolete term for spring, from the French vert (meaning "green"-from which such words as "verdure" and "verdant" are also derived). 
The marriage that is being so celebrated is between none other than Theseus and Hippolyta, the same couple who were being married at the start of A Midsummer Night's Dream (see page I-18). In fact, some critics suggest that Shakespeare used Chaucer's "Knight's Tale" as the original inspiration of A Midsummer Night's Dream, borrowing the marriage as the frame and then filling it with his own subplots. Here in The Two Noble Kinsmen he follows Chaucer in the subplot as well. 
In The Two Noble Kinsmen, Theseus is supplied with a friend, Pirithous, who was lacking in A Midsummer Night's Dream. Pirithous is an authentic mythological character. It was at his marriage that a famous battle with centaurs took place (see page I-46). 
The best-known myth concerning Theseus and Pirithous deals with an occasion when the latter decided to gain for himself the hand of none other than Proserpina, queen of the underworld (see page I-15). Theseus loyally offered to help and the two invaded Hades. There both were magically imprisoned in chairs from which they could not rise, and it seemed, in punishment for their presumption, that this situation would last eternally. Hercules, however, eventually rescued them. According to some versions, he rescued only Theseus and left Pirithous forever imprisoned in Hades. 
Hippolyta in this play is given a sister whom she did not have in A Midsummer Night's Dream. This is Emilia, a character who does not belong to classical myth at all, but to medieval fiction. She is to be the heroine of this play, the puppet about whom will circle the mummery of courtly love. 


Ö cruel Creon Ö




Before the marriage can take place, however, three queens enter. Each kneels, pleading, before a separate member of the wedding party, and a stately back-and-forth begins. The First Queen (given no other name in the play) falls at the feet of Theseus, and says: 


We are three queens, whose sovereigns fell before

The wrath of cruel Creon; who endured

The beaks of ravens, talons of the kites,

And pecks of crows, in the foul fields of Thebes.

He will not suffer us to burn their bones,

To urn their ashes Ö





óAct I, scene i, lines 39-44 


It was in Thebes that the famous legend of Oedipus was set. Oedipus, who had been cast away as an infant and had been brought up far away from Thebes, did not know he was the son of the Theban King and Queen. Visiting Thebes, he unknowingly killed the King and married the Queen-killing his father and marrying his mother, whence we get the expression "Oedipus complex." By his own mother Oedipus had two sons, Eteocles and Polyneices, and two daughters, Ismene and Antigone. 
After the truth of the matter came out, Oedipus blinded himself and went into voluntary exile, while his mother-wife, Jocasta, committed suicide. 
Jocasta's younger brother, Creon, became effective ruler of Thebes. Creon supported Eteocles, Oedipus' elder son, for the succession. Polyneices, the younger son, went into exile and talked certain leaders of the city of Argos, sixty miles southwest of Thebes, into leading an army against his city. 
Five Argjve leaders took up the struggle. With them was not only Polyneices, but also Tydeus, who was a refugee in Argos because he had fled his home town after accidentally killing his brother. Tydeus was the father of Diomedes, who was to be an important Greek warrior at the siege of Troy and an important character in Shakespeare's Troilus and Cressida (see page I-79). 
The tale of the expedition of these leaders against Thebes is usually called "The Seven Against Thebes," though in The Two Noble Kinsmen the number is reduced to three. 
The seven were defeated, and Creon remained master of the field. As a punishment for the aggressors (and particularly for Polyneices, who had warred against his own city-an act of treason for which no personal wrongs were deemed sufficient excuse), Creon ordered the fallen warriors on the Argive side to remain in the field unburied, a prey to carrion birds and beasts. 
This was a terrible fate for Greeks, who felt that until a dead body had been burned with appropriate rites, its shade must wander restlessly about the border of Hades. In fact, it was held impious of Creon to dictate such a fate, since it was wrong to inflict it even on hated enemies. 
The Greek playwright Sophocles wrote one of the greatest of the surviving Greek dramas on this subject. Entitled Antigone, it dealt with Oedipus' younger daughter, who felt that the religious obligation to bury her fallen brother, Polyneices, transcended all other considerations. She accomplishes the deed even though it means her own death. 
The three queens apparently have attempted to do Antigone's deed but have failed, and now they have come to ask Theseus to invade Thebes, punish Creon, and see to it that the fallen warriors are duly burned. 


King Capaneus. ..




Theseus is sympathetic to the appeal, for he has met the First Queen before. He says: 


King Capaneus was your lord. The day

That he should marry you, at such a season

As now it is with me, I met your groom.





óAct I, scene i, lines 59-61 


Capaneus was one of the seven against Thebes and his death was dramatic. He had placed a ladder against Thebes's wall and, climbing it, boasted that not even Jupiter (Zeus) could keep him out of the city now. Promptly, he was struck by a lightning bolt and killed. He had a son, named Sthenelus, who was to be at the siege of Troy as companion and friend of Diomedes. Sthenelus appears in the Iliad but not in Shakespeare's Troilus and Cressida. 
Capaneus' wife was named Evadne, and presumably it is she who is the First Queen. 


Ö his Nemean hide




On the occasion of the marriage of Capaneus and Evadne, Theseus met the bride as well and found her beautiful. Nor was he the only one. Theseus says: 


Hercules our kinsman, Then weaker than your eyes, laid by his club:

He tumbled down upon his Nemean hide

And swore his sinews thawed.





óAct I, scene i, lines 66-69 


The reference is to the first labor (see page I-24) of Hercules. That was to kill a lion that infested the valley of Nemea, ten miles southwest of Corinth. This Nemean lion was no normal beast, but an enormous monster whose hide was impenetrable to any weapon. 
Hercules tried arrows, sword, and club, but nothing would make an impression. He therefore seized the beast's throat and throttled it to death. He then flayed the creature with the only thing that could cut through its hide, its own razor-sharp claws. Forever after, he wore the lion's hide as a protective shield.


Ö the helmeted BellonaÖ




Theseus orders the Queen to stand, and accepts the task, saying: 


O no knees, none, widow,

Unto the helmeted Bellona use them,

And pray for me your soldier.





óAct I, scene i, lines 74-76 


Bellona is not a member of the Greek mythological group. She is a Roman war goddess (the Latin word for war is bellum) and was considered either the wife or sister of Mars. There was a temple to Bellona outside the city of Rome, and the Senate met there when negotiating with foreign ambassadors, or when greeting the return of victorious generals. 


Ö the banks of AulisÖ




The Second Queen pleads with Hippolyta, the Third with Emilia. Both are sympathetic but Theseus naturally wishes to continue with the wedding before taking care of Creon. The queens (and even Hippolyta and her sister) plead with Theseus to reverse matters and make war with Creon first. 
Theseus agrees at last and says to an officer: 


Hence you,

And at the banks of Aulis meet us with

The forces you can raise Ö





óAct I, scene i, lines 210-12 


Aulis was famous as the place where the ships of the Greek host gathered (in the generation after Theseus) to sail to Troy. Shakespeare could not resist, therefore, having Theseus gather his army there. 
Aulis is on the seacoast of Greece, just where the large island of Euboea comes nearest the mainland, leaving a strait, the Euripus, not more than a mile wide. In these constricted waters a fleet can gather in safety. From Aulis there is a sea voyage of 170 miles northeast, as the crow flies, to reach Troy. 
Of what use, however, to assemble at a seaport in order to send an army from Athens to Thebes, since the two cities are separated by land? Thebes is thirty-five miles northwest of Athens, and to travel to Aulis improves the situation very little. Besides, Aulis is in Theban-dominated territory and an Athenian army would very likely have to fight a battle as soon as it gets to Aulis.


Dear PalamonÖ




The scene now shifts to Thebes, and, specifically, to two young Theban soldiers. One of them begins: 


Dear Palamon, dearer in love than blood

And our prime cousin Ö





óAct I, scene ii, lines 1-2


The speaker is Arcite. Needless to say, nowhere in the Greek body of myth are Palamon and Arcite to be found. They are creations strictly of the medieval romancers. They are ideal medieval knights, brave, noble, chivalrous beyond all qualification, and devoted one to the other. 
They are apparently of the family of Oedipus, for as they bemoan the corruption and decadence of Thebes, Palamon begins to lay the worst of the blame on an individual that Arcite guesses at once, saying: 


Our uncle Creon.





óAct I, scene ii, line 62 


However, the news of Theseus' invasion comes and the two young soldiers, who had been planning to leave Thebes, realize that whatever their disenchantment with the city, they must fight for it against foreign invaders. 


Ö great Apollo's mercyÖ






The battle is won by Theseus and the bodies of the dead warriors are rescued. They will be given all the proper funeral rites by the queens.
Theseus' victory over Thebes is mentioned, in passing, in A Midsummer Night's Dream (see page I-47). An affecting tale concerning Evadne, the First Queen, is not mentioned in The Two Noble Kinsmen. When her dead husband, Capaneus, was being burned, Evadne found she could not bear to part with him. She threw herself, living, on the fire, and burned to death. 
The battle had had another result as well. It brought Palamon and Arcite into Athenian hands as prisoners. The Theban youths fought marvelously, but were overwhelmed and are wounded and near death. Theseus has, however, been impressed by their fighting and orders that physicians attempt to save their lives. He says:


For our love

And great Apollo's mercy, all our best

Their best skill tender.





óAct I, scene iv, lines 45-47 


Apollo is the god of the fine arts, and apparently medicine was considered one of them. (He was also the god of disease, for it was his arrows which were pictured as striking down the population of a city struck by the plague.) Asclepius, who is described in the myths as a specific god of medicine, is a son of Apollo. 


Ö a Parthian quiverÖ




Whereas the entire first act is considered Shakespeare's, most of the second, third, and fourth acts are considered Fletcher's. 
Palamon and Arcite are recovered from their wounds, but they are in an Athenian prison now. They are guarded by a jailer who has a pretty daughter. Neither is given a name, but are called merely "Jailer" and "Daughter" in the stage directions. There is also a young man who is in love with the daughter, and he is called only "Wooer." 
The two Thebans expect to remain in prison for life and together they mourn the joys they shall never taste again, such as hunting: 


No more now must we halloo, no more shake

Our pointed javelins, whilst the angry swine

Flies like a Parthian quiver from our rages,

Struck with our well-steeled darts.





óAct II, scene i, lines 107-10

The Parthians were an ancient people who ruled over what is now Iraq and Iran and who were noted for their ability as horse archers. The Romans fought them for centuries and were occasionally defeated by them. A boar struck by many darts would be as full of arrows as a Parthian quiver. 
The remark is anachronistic, of course, if we consider the time to be really that of Theseus. Parthia did not develop as a nation until about 250 b.c., a full thousand years after the time of Theseus. On the other hand, if we allow our mind to wander forward to medieval times in the Palamon and Arcite scenes, the reference to Parthia ceases to be an anachronism.


Ö a noble kinsman




Still, the two young men have each other and it occurs to them that while they are together, they have an important part of life. Each hymns the other's friendship, until it seems that their enforced company brings them to the height of bliss and that such friendship as theirs could not possibly be severed. 
At that moment, though, Emilia and a maid come into the garden adjoining the prison. They gather flowers and Emilia comments on the myth of Narcissus (see page I-10). 
Even while Palamon and Arcite are swearing total friendship, first Palamon, then Arcite, sees Emilia from a window and instantly (such is the convention of courtly love) falls entirely in love with her to the point where there is no room for any other emotion. 
The two friends are suddenly competitors and Palamon claims sole right to the love since he saw Emilia first and called Arcite's attention to her. Arcite, however, points out that he too is subject to passions and says: 


Why then would you deal so cunningly,

So strangely, so unlike a noble kinsman,

To love alone?





óAct II, scene i, lines 250-52 


Here is the reference from which the title of the play is taken. Palamon and Arcite are "the two noble kinsmen." 


Ö against the Maying




The quarrel between them is suspended when Arcite is called away. The news is quickly brought back to Palamon that Arcite, on Pirithous' request, has been released from prison, but banished forever from Athens. 
Palamon fears that Arcite, free, may yet lead an army back to Athens to try to win Emilia. Arcite, on the other hand, as he takes the road back to Thebes, fears that Palamon, in Athens, though imprisoned, may have an opportunity to woo and win Emilia. 
At this point, Arcite comes upon a group of country people intent on a holiday. One of them says, in fact: 


Do we all hold, against the Maying?





óAct II, scene ii, line 36 


Here, as in A Midsummer Night's Dream, that other play set against the Theseus-Hippolyta marriage, we have a group of members of the lower classes arranging a rustic performance. It is a May Day celebration, and A Midsummer Night's Dream seems to have taken place at May Day too (see page I-45). 
Arcite decides to violate the exile order, join the countrymen, and in rustic guise participate in the athletic contests that accompany the May Day celebration. 
As we might expect, he wins at wrestling before the eyes of Theseus and the court (who fail to recognize him-all disguises are effective in Shakespearean plays). Arcite even has the happiness of talking to Emilia and being accepted as her servant. 


Ö the King of Pigmies




Arcite does not, however, have it all his own way. The Jailer's Daughter has fallen in love with Palamon and has let him out of his jail cell, though unable, at the moment, to arrange his liberation from the chains upon him. 
Palamon finds Arcite and challenges him to a duel, but their old friendship is not entirely gone. Arcite helps him hide, then gets him food and wine, together with files with which to remove the shackles. They even try to reminisce fondly about earlier loves that did not come between them, but then Emilia's name comes up and they are ready for slaughter again. 
Meanwhile, however, the poor Daughter, in a series of short scenes by herself, makes a gradual descent from love for Palamon, to a passionate search for him so that she might file off the shackles, to heartbreak at being unable to find him and fearing him dead, and, at last, to madness. She begins to talk nonsense built about her desire to know of the lost and absent Palamon: 


Would I could find a fine frog; he would tell me

News from all parts o'th'world; then would I make

A carack of a cockleshell, and sail

By east and north-east to the King of Pigmies,

For he tells fortunes rarely.





óAct III, scene iv, lines 12-16 


The Pygmies are first mentioned in Homer's Iliad, as a dwarfish people who perpetually war against cranes (and who, one would suppose, are therefore small enough to be eaten by cranes). The very word "pygmy" comes from a Greek word meaning the length of the arm from elbow to knuckles, which would imply that the little creatures were about a foot high. They were supposed to live somewhere in Ethiopia, the Greek name for the mysterious regions south of Egypt. 
By modern times the Pygmies were dismissed as but another figment of the fertile Greek imagination, but then, oddly enough, a race of short human beings (not one foot high, to be sure, but averaging some four feet high) were discovered in central Africa in the nineteenth century. 
It seems fairly reasonable to suppose that some of them were encountered by Egyptian armies adventuring southward, for, in the time of their stronger dynasties, the Egyptians controlled regions far into what is now the Sudan. Individual pygmies were very likely brought back as prisoners and rumors of such human beings, with the shortness exaggerated, would then serve as the basis for the Greek legend. 
The Daughter also sings a sad song which deals with a maiden who searches for her love, and then, worn out and weary, she adds: 


O for a prick now like a nightingale,

To put my breast against! I shall sleep like a top else.





óAct III, scene iv, lines 25-26 


The nightingale's song can be heard all night long and it was a common folk belief that it had to lean against a thorn so that the pain would keep it awake and singing. 


Ö Meleager and the boar




The countrymen have now worked out a dance with which to amuse and please Theseus and Hippolyta, who are out hunting. (This is reminiscent of the play Pyramus and Thisbe which entertained the same couple in A Midsummer Night's Dream.) 
The countrymen are under the direction of a pedantic schoolmaster who interlards his speech with unnecessarily learned allusions. Thus, he tells them all to hide in the thicket and come out on signal to surprise Theseus: 


/ fling my cap up-mark there-then do you,

As once did Meleager and the boar,

Break comely out before himÖ





óAct III, scene v, lines 17-19 


Meleager, in the Greek myths, was a king of Calydon in Aetolia. He is best known in connection with a monstrous boar who had been sent by Diana (Artemis) to ravage the Calydonian countryside. A huge expedition was organized to track down and kill the "Calydonian boar," and, as a matter of fact, Theseus and Pirithous were among the heroes present on the occasion. 
At one point in the hunt, the boar came dashing out of the thicket at Theseus, whose hastily thrown javelin went wide. He might have been killed but for the fact that Meleager, who was on the spot, threw more accurately, diverted the beast, then killed him. 
Under the circumstances, the schoolmaster's allusion is most inappropriate. 


Ö dance a morris




As the countrymen take their places, it turns out that one girl is missing. For a moment, it looks as though all is ruined, but the Jailer's Daughter, quite mad, wanders onto the scene and she is at once pressed into service. 
Theseus and his party are now coming. The countrymen hide and the schoolmaster confronts Theseus, saying: 


We are a merry rout, or else a rabble

Or company, or by a figure Chorus,

That 'fore thy dignity will dance a morris.





óAct III, scene v, lines 105-7 


The "morris dance" was part of the May Day celebration. In its origins it was probably some kind of magical rite, involving men in the guise of animals, who are shot at. This may have been a way of ensuring successful hunting, and there may also have been included some general fertility rituals, involving a King and Queen of the May. 
Indeed, the schoolmaster mentions them when he enumerates the company. He himself appears first, he says, and then: 


The next the Lord of May, and Lady bright,





óAct III, scene v, line 124 


There were other characters as well, including one at least who made the fertility nature of the celebration unmistakable. He was a farcical fool called the "Bavian" who was equipped with a tail which perhaps showed his descent from the tailed satyrlike fertility spirits of the wildwood. The schoolmaster, in preparing his muster earlier, was concerned lest the fool go too far, for he said: 


Where's the Bavian?

My friend, carry your tail without offense

Or scandal to the ladies;





óAct HI, scene v, lines 33-35 


But it is clear that the tail is not the only appendage the Bavian has. He has a phallus too, and a prominent one, which can scarcely avoid giving offense if the ladies are in the least delicate. Nevertheless, the schoolmaster in introducing the company before Theseus and his party officiously points out what needs no pointing out: 


Ö and next the Fool, The Bavian

with long tail, and eke long tool,





óAct III, scene v, lines 130-31 


Perhaps to lessen the pagan character of the May Day celebration and reduce churchly opposition, new and popular characters were introduced in the form of Robin Hood and Maid Marian (as the King and Queen of the May) together with other members of his band. After all, Robin hunted deer and so completely lived in the forest as to be considered almost a spirit of the wildwood. He would fit the celebration, and his popularity would help make the morris dance respectable. 
Why morris dance, by the way? One theory is that the dance was brought in from Spain in the time of King Edward III (when his son, the Black Prince, campaigned for a time in that land; see page II-260). It was, according to that view, a Moorish military dance, and from Moorish dance to morris dance is but a step. Another theory is that the dancers blacked themselves as part of their disguise and were Moorish in that sense. 
The dance, when given, adds another bit of pageantry to the play. 


By Castor. ..




Arcite and Palamon are now ready for their duel. They help each other into armor with every sign of affection and with mutual praise, but they fight in earnest, for the requirements of courtly love are that a knight must sacrifice all else. 
Theseus and his company, still hunting, come upon the duelers. Theseus is furious, for dueling is against the law. He says, angrily, even before he knows the identity of the fighters: 


By Castor, both shall die.





óAct III, scene vi, line 137 


It is unusual to swear by Castor alone, for he is one of an inseparable pair, Castor and Polydeuces (or Pollux). They were twin brothers who were the model of fraternal affection. They were born of Leda and were brothers of Helen, whose beauty later caused the Trojan War. 
To swear by Castor is inappropriate for another reason, for Castor and his twin brother were contemporaries of Theseus and were still alive. They had not yet attained the status of gods. 
In any case, Theseus' vow does not stand. Everyone, Pirithous, Hippolyta, and Emilia, pleads with him to let the warriors fight it out. Since Emilia refuses to choose between them but offers to accept the winner- quite in line with the conventions of courtly love-Theseus gives them a month's grace and then each, accompanied by three friends apiece, can join battle formally for the hand of the lady. 


Ö as Iris




The Jailer's mad Daughter is back at home now and her faithful Wooer comes anxiously to learn of her. He had seen her roaming the countryside in her madness and had found her as beautiful 


Ö as Iris

Newly dropped down from heaven.





-Act IV, scene i, lines 87-88 


The name "Iris" means "rainbow" and she was the representation of that phenomenon. Since the rainbow seems like a delicate bridge in the sky, it was easy to imagine that it served as a route between heaven and earth. From the route itself, the name was applied to a messenger who plied that route, and Iris was therefore a messenger, carrying divine orders to mortals and serving Juno (Hera) in particular. 


.. wanton Ganymede




Emilia has her problems. She is distressed that either Palamon or Arcite should die for her. She could prevent it if only she could choose between them, but she can't She has a picture of each, and each she in turns admires. Of Arcite, she says: 


Just such another wanton Ganymede

Set Jove a-fire with and enforced the god

Snatch up the goodly boy.. .





óAct IV, scene ii, lines 15-16


Ganymede, in the Greek myths, was a beautiful Trojan prince, with whom Jupiter (Zeus) fell in love. Jupiter took on the guise of an eagle and carried Ganymede off, taking him to heaven where he became the wine pourer of the gods. This is another case of homosexuality attributed to the gods, as in the case of Apollo and Hyacinthus (see page I-15)-this time of Jupiter himself. 
The use of Jove for Jupiter, as in this passage, is common. Jove is from a Latin word that means simply "god." 


Ö Pelops" shoulder




Of Arcite's brow, Emilia goes on to say that it is 


Arched like the great-eyed Juno's, but far sweeter,

Smoother than Pelops" shoulder!





óAct IV, scene ii, lines 20-21 


Pelops was the son whom Tantalus killed and served as food for the gods (see page I-13). The gods recognized what was being served them and, with one exception, did not eat of the food. The exception was Deme-ter, who, sorrowing over Proserpina (see page I-7), had absent-mindedly eaten some of the shoulder. The gods, in bringing Pelops back to life, replaced the missing part with ivory so that Pelops' shoulder served, in literature, as a standard for smoothness. 
óBut then Emilia looks at Palamon's picture and thinks he is equally wonderful. She cannot choose. 


Ö a piece of silver. ..




While this is going on, the Jailer has brought a doctor to treat his mad daughter. All she can do is talk of Palamon, nothing but Palamon. She thinks Palamon is dead and that in the next world Dido will abandon Aeneas (see page I-20) for Palamon's sake. The reference to Dido is as anachronistic here as it was in A Midsummer Night's Dream. 
She seems to be thinking of death herself, to join Palamon in the after-world. This requires certain rites, of course: 


Ö you must bring a piece of silver

on the tip of your tongue, or no ferry.





óAct IV, scene iii, lines 19-21 


The Greeks felt that Charon, the ferrier of the underworld, would not take a shade over the Styx River into Hades unless he were paid, and for the purpose a small coin was usually placed in the corpse's mouth. 


Ö pick flowers with Proserpine Ö




The Daughter imagines that once in the Elysian Fields (see page I-13), all would be well: 


we shall come there, and do nothing all day long

but pick flowers with Proserpine.

Then will I make Palamon a nose gayÖ





óAct IV, scene iii, lines 24-26 


Proserpina was picking flowers when she was carried off by Hades (see page I-7) and that action is therefore associated with her. 
The doctor, listening to all this, decides that the only way the Daughter can possibly be cajoled out of her madness is to let her think she has Palamon. He therefore urges the Wooer to play the part of Palamon in all possible ways. The Wooer agrees and the Daughter accepts him in this role. Mad or not, the play ends happily for these two. 


Ö methought AlcidesÖ




The tournament between the knights led by Arcite and by Palamon is ready to begin, and in the fifth act Shakespeare's pen takes over for heavy pageantry. Both warriors must offer prayer to the gods. Arcite chooses to pray to Mars (Ares), the god of war, and receives the approval of his request for victory in the form of a short burst of thunder. 
Palamon chooses to pray not to Mars but to Venus, the goddess of love (a wiser choice by the rules of courtly love), and he receives a positive sign too, in the form of music and doves. 
Emilia prays also, to the virginal Diana (Artemis), asking that the one who best loves her should win her. She receives an answer as the sole rose falls from a rosebush. 
The tournament is nip and tuck, but it is fought offstage. At first the cries seem to make Palamon the winner, but in the end it is Arcite by a narrow margin and Mars's omen is fulfilled. 
Theseus greatly admires both. Palamon, the loser, is highly praised: 


Ö methought Alcides was To him a sow of lead.





óAct V, scene iii, lines 119-20 


Greeks generally had a single name. There was considerable chance of duplication, therefore, and it was necessary to identify people by their native cities or by their father's name. One might say "Diomedes, son of Tydeus" (see page I-57), or simply "son of Tydeus," as another way of referring to Diomedes. In Greek fashion, "son of Tydeus" would be "Tydides." 
It was difficult to call Hercules by the name of his father, since he was the son of Jupiter, who had come to his mother Alcmene in the guise of her husband Amphitryon. With Amphitryon notoriously cuckolded, the myth-makers could scarcely call him "Amphitryonides." They evaded the issue by naming him for his grandfather, Alcaeus, Amphitryon's father. He is therefore called Alcides. 
And yet though Arcite has won the battle by Mars's grace, Palamon wins the lady by Venus' grace. Arcite, in triumph, mounts a horse who, through accident, throws him and falls upon him. Arcite is brought onstage, dying, and gives his right to Emilia to Palamon. This is justified by Theseus' statement that Arcite had admitted, after all, that Palamon had seen the lady first. 
With that, all the rules of courtly love are satisfied and the play can come to an end. 








4. The History of Trolius And Cressida


The most famous event in the early history of Greece was the Trojan War, fought a generation after the time of Theseus-or shortly before 1200 b.c. Concerning that war, we have only the legendary tale told by Homer, a Greek poet who supposedly lived in the ninth century b.c. 
Whether Homer actually lived, or whether the poems ascribed to him were written by one man or many, has exercised the ingenuity of literary critics for over two thousand years, but that is not the sort of problem that concerns us here. 
What does concern us is that the Homeric poems have (along with the Bible and Shakespeare's plays) been the most notable and influential works of literature ever produced in the Western world, and that in 1601 Shakespeare wrote his own version of the Homeric tale. 
Shakespeare was by no means the first, nor was he the last, to do a version of Homer. 
Homer's poem may have first been put together about 850 b.c. and have been sung or recited by bard after bard, the tale being carried or from generation to generation through oral tradition. About 500 B.c it was carefully edited by Athenian scholars and placed into the form we now have. 
Homer tells the tale of but a single episode in the long Trojan War which, according to legend, lasted ten years. The episode takes place in the tenth and last year and deals with a quarrel between two of the Greek leaders, with the near disaster that befalls the Greek cause as a result, and with the dramatic reconciliation that follows after all the participants have suffered tragic losses. 
In the course of the epic, hints are given as to events that took place before the incident of the quarrel and of events that were to take place after the reconciliation. The popularity of Homer's tale led later Greek poets and dramatists to try their hand at telling other portions of the tale based on Homer's references and on other legends then extant but no surviving today. 
Other ancient writers even tried retelling the tale of the quarrel itself in their own way, and the habit of doing so continued through the Middle Ages and into modern times. In 1925, for instance, the American write:
John Erskine published The Private Life of Helen of Troy, putting the tale of Troy into twentieth-century idiom. 
Shakespeare tried his hand at it too, producing, alas, a play that is not considered one of his better productions and is by no means worthy of the grand original. 


In Troy Ö




Shakespeare chooses to tell (more or less) the same incident that concerns Homer, which means that he too must concentrate on the final stages of a long siege. Where Homer was dealing with incidents in a war which (in his time) must have been well known to all Greeks, with its heroes' names being household words, Shakespeare was not quite in the same position. 
Educated Englishmen in Shakespeare's time knew of the Trojan War, but chiefly through writings on the subject in Roman and medieval times. It was only toward the end of the sixteenth century that Homer's poem itself was translated into English by George Chapman (whose work inspired a famous sonnet by John Keats two centuries later). At the time Troilus and Cressida was being written, only a third of that translation had yet appeared, so it is doubtful how much firsthand knowledge of Homer's actual tale Shakespeare himself had and how much he had to depend on later (and distorted) versions of the Troy tale. 
Shakespeare did not apparently feel safe in starting, as Homer did, toward the end of the war, and inserts a somewhat apologetic Prologue to set the stage. The Prologue begins directly: 


In Troy there lies the scene.





óPrologue, line 1 


The name of the walled city which endured the long siege was, apparently, Ilion (or Ilium, in the Latin spelling). Homer's poem is therefore called the Iliad. The region in which Ilium was located was known as Troas or the Troad, and from this, the city took the alternate name of Troia. It is the English form of this latter name, Troy, that is most familiar to us. 
It is over three thousand years now since Troy was destroyed and yet, thanks to Homer, its name remains forever fresh to us. 
Indeed, it remained fresh and alive through a period in early modern times when skeptical scholars considered the Trojan War to have been purely mythical and were sure that no city of Troy had ever existed. Considering that Homer filled his tale with gods, goddesses, monsters, and wonders, it was easy to feel skepticism.
However, after all the overlay of the marvellous has been scraped away, a core remains and, as it turns out, that core has value. 
A German businessman, Heinrich Schliemann, who implicitly believed the essential truth of the Iliad (minus its gods), amassed wealth and in the late nineteenth century used it to go to Greece and Turkey, where he hoped to dig up the ruins of Troy and some of the great Greek cities of the time. From the 1860s to his death in 1890, he achieved phenomenal success, locating the site of Troy and other places mentioned in the Iliad. 
Historians now know quite a bit about the early phase of Greek history, which they call the Mycenaean Age. From what they have learned, we find that Homer's tale is a surprisingly faithful rendering (though with a few anachronisms) of Mycenaean society. Historians are now just as certain that there was a siege of Troy, as a century ago they were certain there was not. 
Ö isles of Greece The Prologue goes on to describe those who were attacking Troy: 


From isles of Greece

The princes orgulous, their high blood chafed,

Have to the port of Athens sent their ships,





óPrologue, lines 1-3 


According to the legend, it was a combined expedition of Greek forces drawn from all the petty kingdoms that were then to be found in Greece. In theory, all acknowledged an overlord who ruled in the southern portion of the peninsula and it was this overlord who acted as commander in chief of the expedition. 
The overlordship was not tight, however, and the leaders of the various contingents were very aware of their own rights and privileges. There was a strong resemblance between the situation in Mycenaean Greece and that in medieval Europe, where a king was titular overlord but could only with the greatest difficulty induce his various dukes and counts to obey him. Shakespeare was not so far removed from this stage of history to fail to understand it, hence his reference to the princes "orgulous"; that is, "haughty." 
The Greek forces, coming from various regions, had to meet at some gathering place to form a unified fleet. According to legend, that meeting place was at Aulis, a harbor in Boeotia, protected by the long island of Euboea (see page I-59). 
Shakespeare here makes the gathering place Athens, which is incorrect


Ö toward Phrygia




Having gathered, the united fleet now moves on across the Aegean Sea toward Troy. The total number of ships is given: 


Ö Sixty and nine, that wore

Their crownets regal, from th'Athenian bay

Put forth toward Phrygia;





óPrologue, lines 5-7 


In Mycenaean times, a people we now call the Phrygians were in control of western Asia Minor. They still dominated the area in the supposed time in which Homer lived, three and a half centuries after the Trojan War, so he could speak of them familiarly. Their power was not destroyed till about 700 b.c. when the nomadic Cimmerians from the regions north of the Black Sea invaded Asia Minor and wreaked widespread destruction. The name "Phrygia" was still applied to a region of west central Asia Minor throughout ancient times, however. 
The chances are that the Trojans (although pictured in the Iliad as being in no way different from the Greeks in language, customs, or religion) were Phrygians. 
Shakespeare's mention of 69 ships is an extremely modest underestimate of the legendary number. The Iliad lists the numbers of ships brought by each Greek contingent in Book Two and the total comes to 1186. Christopher Marlowe in his play Dr. Faustus is closer to Homer, by far, when he has Faustus cry out at seeing the shade of the beautiful woman who, according to legend, brought on the war, "Was this the face that launched a thousand ships-" 


The ravished Helen. ..




The basic cause of the expedition was undoubtedly most unromantic. Troy controlled the narrow waters between the Aegean Sea and the Black Sea and was, therefore, master of an important trade route. By charging tolls for passage, they grew rich, and this made the city a valuable prize for any freebooting expedition. 
Not only did Troy's wealth form a tempting target, but the Mycenaeans were being prodded from behind. New tribes of Greeks from the north, relatively uncivilized ones called Dorians, were making their pressure felt. Conditions at home were less settled than they had been and the urge to take part in piratical expeditions overseas increased. 
Indeed, the time of the Trojan War was one of great turmoil throughout the civilized world and it was not only Troy that was suffering harm from sea raiders. Other raiders ravaged the coast of Egypt and Canaan, for instance. Certain contingents of these raiders settled down on the Canaan-ite coast and became the Philistines, who strongly influenced Israelite history. 
By Homer's time a much more trivial, but much more romantic, cause had been given for the expedition. Shakespeare gives it briefly here. The Greeks, he says, have sworn 


To ransack Troy, within whose strong immures

The ravished Helen, Menelaus" queen,

With wanton Paris sleeps-and that's the quarrel.





óPrologue, lines 8-10 


In ancient times piratical raids were common. Ships would come ashore and armed men would suddenly snatch up cattle and people, then sail away again. If the people captured (and intended for the slave-market) included any of prominent family, reprisal raids might be carried through. The immediate cause of the Trojan War could well have been such a raid, of which the Trojans may have been guilty or which it siuited the Greeks to say that the Trojans were guilty. 
With time, the details of the abduction were adorned and elaborated with complicated myth, and this particular one has become world-famous. I'll give it briefly. 
At a certain wedding (involving a bride and groom who will appear later in this chapter) all the gods and goddesses had been invited-with one exception. Eris, the Goddess of Discord, had been overlooked. She appeared unbidden and in anger tossed a golden apple (the "Apple of Discord") among the guests. It bore the label "To the Fairest." 
At once three goddesses claimed it: Juno (Hera), the wife of Jupiter (Zeus); Minerva (Athena), the Goddess of Wisdom; and Venus (Aphrodite), the Goddess of Beauty. 
The goddesses agreed to accept the decision of Paris, a Trojan prince, and each goddess tried her best to bribe him. Juno offered him power, Minerva offered him wisdom, and Venus offered him the fairest woman in the world for his bride. He chose Venus, which was probably the honest choice in any case. 
There was a complication, though. The fairest woman in the world was Helen, who was already married to Menelaus, King of Sparta. 
Guided by Venus, Paris arrived as a guest in Sparta, was royally treated by Menelaus, and then, when Menelaus was off on state affairs, Paris seized the opportunity to abduct the willing Helen (Paris was very handsome) and carry her off to Troy. 
Menelaus was rightly angry over this and the result was the Greek expedition against Troy.


To Tenedos Ö




The journey of the Greek fleet is followed: 


To Tenedos they come,

And the deep-drawing barks do there disgorge

Their warlike fraughtage. Now on Dardan plains

The fresh and yet unbruised Greeks do pitch

Their brave pavilions.





óPrologue, lines 11-15 


Tenedos is a small island about four miles off the shore of Asia Minor, near Troy. 
Troy itself is several miles inland and the plain between itself and the sea is the "Dardan plain." Dardania is a name for a section of the Trojan coast. The name is derived, according to the myth, from Dardanus, a son of Jupiter. A grandson of Dardanus was Tros, from whose name Troy was derived. 
Having brought the Greeks to Troy, the Prologue now warns the audience that the play will not start at the beginning: 


Ö our play

Leaps o'er the vaunt and firstlings of those broils,

Beginning in the middle,





óPrologue, lines 26-28 


Ö Troilus, alas Ö




Yet though the play begins in the middle of a war, it does not begin with martial scenes or even with martial speeches. It begins with a rather sickly speech of love. 
The fault lies not in Homer but in medieval distortions of the tale. In Shakespeare's time the most popular version of the tale of Troy was a twelfth-century French romance, written by Benoit de Sainte-Maure, called Roman de Troie. Even that wasn't based on Homer directly, but on works written in late Roman times which were themselves altered versions of the original account. 
The Roman de Troie was written when the devices of courtly love (see page I-54) were taking France by storm, so that Homer's vigorously masculine tale became prettified with the addition of an artificial love story. It was the love story, rather than the Homeric background, that interested later writers such as Boccaccio in Italy and Chaucer in England, and through them, Shakespeare.
The first scene of Troilus and Cressida is in Troy. A young Trojan warrior comes on the scene, sulky and petulant because he is being frustrated in love. He is taking off his armor and won't fight, saying: 


Each Troyan that is master of his heart,

Let him to field; Troilus, alas, hath none





óAct I, scene i, lines 4-5 


As the name of the play tells us, the action is to revolve to a large extent about Troilus, but who is he? 
In Homer's Iliad he is dead before the action starts, and he receives exactly one mention. Toward the very end of the book, when the aged King of Troy is making ready to go to the Greek camp to try to ransom the dead body of his most heroic son, he berates his remaining sons, saying,[In my quotations from the Iliad, I am making use of the recent translation by Robert Graves, The Anger of Achilles (Doubleday, 1959). ] "Your dead brothers were the best soldiers in my dominions. Mestor, Troilus the Chariot-Fighter, and Hector, a very god among men-yes, his aspect was rather divine than human-fallen and gone, and mere dregs left me." 
That is all; nothing more.. 
The later poets and commentators filled in the gap, though, and invented various tales concerning Troilus that agreed in only one respect: he was eventually killed by Achilles, the greatest of the Greek warriors. 
Since Troilus is heroic and since his tale is not told (and therefore fixed) by Homer, there is room left for addition in medieval fashion, when the medieval writers took their turn. It was Troilus to whom the tale of courtly love was affixed. 


I'll not meddleÖ




With Troilus is an older man, Pandarus, who listens impatiently to the young hero's sighs. Apparently he has been doing his best to bring the love affair to a happy conclusion. Now he pretends to lose patience, saying: 


Well, I have told you enough of this.

For my part, I'll not meddle nor make no farther.





óAct I, scene i, lines 13-14 


Who is Pandarus? In the Iliad there is indeed a character by this name. He is pictured as an expert archer and appears in Homer's tale on two separate occasions. 
His first appearance is in Book Four of the Iliad. A truce has been declared between the armies and for a moment it seems as though the war may end in a compromise with Helen returned and Troy left standing. Pandarus, however, treacherously shoots an arrow at Menelaus and wounds him. The war goes on. 
Pandarus makes a second appearance in Book Five. He shoots an arrow at Diomedes, one of the major Greek heroes, and wounds him slightly. A little later, he encounters the enraged Greek at close range and is himself killed. Exit Pandarus. 
Shakespeare's Pandarus has no more in common with this other one than the name. In Troilus and Cressida Pandarus is a genial old man, very interested in sex-a kind of voyeur, in fact-and so unashamed in his vicarious delight over the whole matter that he has given the word "pander" to the English language. 
To be sure, it is not Shakespeare who is entirely responsible for this change. Pandarus appears as Pandaro in a short poem ("Filostrato") about this love affair published by the Italian writer Giovanni Boccaccio in 1338. In "Filostrato" Pandaro is the cousin of the girl whom Troilus loves. 
The English poet Chaucer (see page I-54) published in 1385 Troilus and Criseyde, a much longer work, based on "Filostrato." In it Pandaro, the girl's cousin, became Pandare, the girl's uncle. 
It was Shakespeare next who, using Chaucer's poem as a main source, wrote Troilus and Cressida and changed Pandare to Pandarus. 


Ö fair Cressid.. .




Bumblingly, Pandarus urges patience on Troilus, and Troilus retorts that he is already superhumanly patient. He says: 


At Priam's royal table do I sit,

And when fair Cressid comes into my thoughts-





óAct I, scene i, lines 31-32 


Priam is King of Troy, the figure of a royal patriarch. He has, all told, fifty sons and twelve daughters by various wives, and Troilus is one of the sons. When the Greek expedition arrived before the walls of Troy, Priam was too old to fight, but he was still in full authority as king. 
As for "fair Cressid," who is she? She is Pandarus' niece in the play and it is she with whom Troilus is in love, but where does she come from? She is not mentioned, not once, in the Iliad. 
Yet, even so, we can trace her origin from the very first book of the Iliad. In that first book, Homer relates the cause of a quarrel between Agamemnon, the commander in chief of the Greek forces, and the greatest warrior in those forces, Achilles.
The army, it seems, has conducted a raid, carried off captives, and divided the loot. Agamemnon's share included a girl named Chryseis, while Achilles' share included another girl named Briseis. (The similarity in names is unfortunate and is a sure source of confusion.) 
It turns out that Chryseis is the daughter of Chryses, a priest of Apollo. The priest comes to the camp to retrieve his daughter but when he is brusquely turned away by Agamemnon, Apollo (answering his priest's prayer) sends plague into the Greek camp. As a result, Achilles urges Agamemnon to return Chryseis and Agamemnon pettishly insists that, in that case, he will appropriate Briseis in return. 
The quarrel flares and Achilles, in a rage, declares he will retire to his tent. He and his warriors will fight no more on behalf of this miserable leader. (And surely, our sympathies are all with the wronged Achilles at the start.) 
The argument rests entirely on a matter of prestige. Agamemnon's view is that his prerogative as commander in chief is unassailable. Achilles insists that the commander in chief cannot hide behind his office while committing an injustice. The matter of the girls is a trifling symbol of the clash between central authority and individual rights. Homer does not introduce the thought that Agamemnon might be in love with Chryseis or Achilles with Briseis; certainly not in the medieval sense. 
Later writers, however, more romantic than Homer and far less able, cannot resist stressing the love story, and make Achilles in love with Briseis. 
In Benoit's medieval Roman de Troie, another factor is brought in to further complicate the matter and make the love tale even more interesting. The Trojan prince Troilus is also in love with Briseis, so that now there is a triangle of men, Agamemnon, Achilles, and Troilus, all competing for her. 
Benoit distorts the name, and "Briseis" becomes "Briseide." Since it is almost impossible to avoid confusing "Briseis" with "Chryseis," "Briseide" easily becomes "Criseide." Hence Chaucer wrote of Troilus and Criseyde; and by a further small change Shakespeare wrote of Troilus and Cressida. 


Ö Hector or my father.. .




Poor Troilus also complains that he must hide his aching heart and conceal the fact that he is hopelessly in love: 


Lest Hector or my father should perceive me





óAct I, scene i, line 38 


Hector was Priam's oldest son, his father's surrogate in the field, the commander in chief of the Trojan armies. He is the best and greatest warrior on the Trojan side, second only to Achilles as a fighter. He is one of the most attractive personalities in the Iliad and is the picture of patriotism. 
The bias in his favor is far more pronounced in medieval versions of the tale, since the Trojans were supposed to be the ancestors of the Romans, and Rome always had a "good press" in the Middle Ages. Such a bias may also be expected in Shakespeare's play and it is there. Shakespeare consistently pictures Hector as braver and better than Achilles, for instance. 
Why Troilus should be so reluctant to let Priam or Hector know of his love is not made clear in the play. One might argue that it was a time to fight and not to love and that father and older brother would object to having young Troilus moon away his time when the city was in such peril. More likely, however, courtly love is, by convention, supposed to be barred by tremendous hurdles; barriers of law or caste, parental disapproval, royal disfavor, and so on. Troilus must not be allowed to have it too easy, therefore. 


Ö somewhat darker than Helen's




As for Pandarus, it is his task at the moment to keep Troilus' love in flame by a skillful praising of Cressida, saying: 


An her hair were not somewhat darker than Helen's




óAct I, scene i, lines 43-44 


He does not go on and really, the implication that Cressida might almost be compared with Helen can only be considered humorous. 
Ever since the tale of the Trojan War has been extant, Helen has been considered beauty incarnate and beyond comparison. Notice, though, the implication that darker hair is, in itself, a blot on beauty (see page I-436). 


Ö Cassandra's witÖ




Pandarus continues to praise Cressida. Having compared her physical attributes with Helen's, in bumbling style, he searches for a way of praising her mind. He says: 


Ö I would somebody had heard

her talk yesterday, as I did. I will not

dispraise your sister Cassandra's wit, but-




óAct I, scene i, lines 47-49 


Cassandra was one of Priam's daughters Ad the most tragic of them. She was beloved by Apollo and had promise to yield to him if he would give her the gift of prophecy. When he had granted her that favor she nevertheless remained obdurate. The divine gift could not be withdrawn, but in revenge Apollo decreed that no one would ever believe her true prophecies. In other words, people believed her mad. 
The comparison, then, with Cassandra in natter of wit is but another bumble, calculated, perhaps, to draw a laugh from the more knowing in the audience. 


Ö behind her father Ö




Troilus continues to bemoan his fate, obvious to Pandaras' wheedling. The go-between therefore tries the other extreme. Violently, he disowns the whole business and washes his hands of i He will do nothing further for Troilus and says: 


She's a fool to stay behind her father.

Let her to the Greeks, and so

I'll tell her the next time I see her.




óAct I, scene i, lines 83-85 


Cressida's father is Calchas, a priest of Apdo. If Cressida's name is derived from the Iliad's Chryseis, her father's name must be derived from the name of Chryseis' father, Chryses. He too was a priest of Apollo. 
Why "Calchas" from "Chryses"? Because there is also a Calchas in the Iliad. He is a skilled prophet or soothsayer on the Greek side, and can interpret the omens. It is he, for instance, who explained that the plague striking at the Greeks was the result of Agamemnon's refusal to surrender Chryseis to her father. Both Chryses and Calchas are thus involved in the demand that Agamemnon surrender Chryseis. 
There is no hint in the Iliad that Calchas: anything but a Greek and certainly there is no confusion between him ad Chryses. In later stories, however, the confusion arises. Chryses the "Trojan priest of Apollo and Calchas the Greek soothsayer are combined ad the story arises that Calchas, a Trojan priest of Apollo, knowing through his prophetic arts that Troy must fall, deserts to the Greeks. 
The story of the lost daughter is retained, though. Since Calchas/Chryses has now turned voluntarily to the Greeks to remain with them permanently, he can't be trying to retrieve a daughter from the Greeks. After all, he's there. He must, therefore, be trying to retrieve a daughter from the Trojan camp, a daughter he left behind in deserting to the Greeks. And it is this Trojan daughter, Cressida/Chryseis, whom Troilus loves.


Ö thy Daphne's love




Troilus is at once anxious to placate Pandarus, who, after all, remains the only bridge by which he can reach Cressida. Pandarus, however, pushing his advantage, rushes off, leaving Troilus behind to sing Cressida's praises, calling on Apollo (the god of poetry) to help him: 


Tell me, Apollo, for thy Daphne's love,

What Cressid isÖ





óAct I, scene i, 102-3 


It is interesting that Apollo, the personification of male beauty, is so often tragically unsuccessful in his loves. Cassandra refused him, for instance, and Daphne (see page I-36) is an even more famous love. 


What news, Aeneas.. .




Troilus' soliloquy ends when another Trojan warrior enters. He is in full armor, on his way to the battle, and is rather puzzled that Troilus is lingering in Troy. Troilus asks: 


What news, Aeneas, from the field today?





óAct I, scene i, line 11: 


Aeneas, in the legends, is a son of none other than Venus, though hi father, Anchises, was a mortal man. Aeneas was not a Trojan exactly but a Dardanian; that is, the inhabitant of a district neighboring Troy proper He attempted to maintain neutrality in the war at first but the attacks c Achilles forced him to join forces with Priam and his sons. 
None of this is in the Iliad. In the Iliad he is an ardent Trojan fighter second only to Hector. He is a darling of the gods and is saved by Venus and Apollo when about to be killed by Diomedes, and on another occasion by Neptune, when it is Achilles who is about to kill him. 
Homer makes it quite plain that Aeneas is not fated to die in the general sack that destroys Troy (see page I-209). This was the basis of Vergil plot in the Aeneid, which deals with the wanderings of Aeneas after the destruction of Troy. 
Because Aeneas was viewed as the ancestor of the Romans, he had to be treated with particular care by Western poets. The English had to 1 even more careful, for they aped the Romans in their search for a glorious beginning. 
Several medieval chroniclers in England composed versions of a legendary past that traced the early Britons back to Troy. It seems, according them, that Aeneas had had a great-grandson, Brute, who, having inadvertently killed his father, fled Italy and finally landed in the northern island, which got its name of "Britain" from him. 
There is absolutely nothing to it, of course, other than the accidental similarity between the common Roman name Brute or Brutus and the name of Britain. Nevertheless it gave the English a profound interest in the tale of Troy and a strong pro-Trojan sympathy. In particular, Aeneas must be, and is, idealized. In Troilus and Cressida he is gay, debonair, and the perfect medieval knight. 


Ö Menelaus' horn




Aeneas tells Troilus that Paris has been wounded in a duel with Menelaus. (Such a duel is described in Book Three of the Iliad and it is after that duel, which Menelaus wins, that a truce is negotiated, a truce which is broken by Pandarus' arrow-see page I-79). 
Troilus shrugs it off: 


Let Paris bleed; 'tis but a scar to scorn:

Paris is gored with Menelaus' horn.




óAct I, scene i, lines 115-16 


There was an accepted convention in Shakespearean England that a betrayed husband had horns; invisible ones, of course. This may be from a consideration of the sexual life of the polygamous stags, who fight each other for the possession of a harem of does. The deceived husband is, perhaps, likened to a defeated stag; hence his horns. 
The husband whose wife had fooled him was universally viewed with amused contempt in Shakespeare's time. This attitude arose, perhaps, from the conventions of courtly love, (see page I-54) where the knight was, ideally, supposed to love the wife of another. In all such tales, the husband was the villain (witness the well-known romance of Tristan and Iseult) and the audience cheered when the horns were, so to speak, placed on his forehead. 
The betrayed husband was therefore an inexhaustible theme for comedy and any mention of horns or horned animals, even any reference to foreheads, was the signal for laughter-and Shakespeare made the most of that. 
Thus it is that Troilus scorns poor wronged Menelaus. To modern ears, which do not find adultery either as serious or as comic as the Elizabethans did, such jests fall flat.


Queen Hecuba Ö




The scene shifts to Cressida now. She enters with her servant, Alexander, looking after two women who have hastened by. She inquires who those were who passed and Alexander answers: 


Queen Hecuba and Helen.




óAct I, scene ii, line 1b 


Queen Hecuba (or Hecabe, in the Greek form) was the second wife of Priam. She bore him nineteen of his sixty-two children, including Hector, Paris, Troilus, and Cassandra of those mentioned so far. Because of her sufferings, she was a favorite character in tragic dramas devoted to the Trojan War and, indeed, in Hamlet Shakespeare makes use of this fact indirectly (see page II-115). Here, in Troilus and Cressida, however, she never appears onstage. 


He chid Andromache Ö




Apparently the two women are hastening to the walls to see the battle, for they fear it may be going poorly. After all, even Hector is perturbed, or as the servant says: 


Hector, whose patience Is as a virtue fixed, today was moved.

He chid Andromache, and struck his armorer,




óAct I, scene ii, lines 4-6 


Andromache is Hector's wife. The last part of Book Six of the Iliad is devoted to a scene in which she hurries with her infant son, Scamandrius, to meet Hector before he leaves the city on his way to the battle. It is the most touching scene of married love in Homer. Andromache pleads with Hector to stay in the city, for all her own relatives are dead. "So, dear Hector," she says, "you are now not merely my husband-you are father, mother, and brother, too!" 
But Hector must go and he reaches out his arms to give his son a farewell and to pray over him, hoping that someday the child's feats will be such that all will agree that "His father was the lesser man!" Alas, it was not to be, for Hector's son was killed when Troy was destroyed. 


A lord of Troyan blood.,.




To make Hector scold Andromache, something most unusual must have happened. Cressida asks what that might be and is told: 


Ö there is among the Greeks

A lord of Troyan blood, nephew to Hector;

They call him Ajax.




óAct I, scene ii, lines 12-14 


Ajax plays a great role in the Iliad. He is one of two men in the epic that bears the name. Since the one here referred to is particularly large, he is called "Ajax the Greater." Of the two, only "the Greater" appears in Troilus and Cressida, so it suffices to call him Ajax. 
In the Iliad Ajax is the strongest of the Greeks, save only for Achilles, but is considerably more renowned for his strength than for his subtlety. He is never wounded in the Iliad, and he is the only important hero who never at any time personally receives the help of a god or a goddess. He is the epitome of success through hard work, without inspiration. 
He is not, in the Iliad, of Trojan blood; nor is he a nephew to Hector. The attribution of Trojan blood to Ajax is probably the result of confusion with Ajax's half brother (see page I-103). 


Ö a gouty Briareus Ö




Alexander goes on to describe Ajax and makes him out to be a parody of the picture presented in Homer; as nothing more than a stolid, dim-witted man-mountain. He says of Ajax: 


Ö he is a gouty Briareus, many hands and no use,

or purblind Argus, all eyes and no sight.





óAct I, scene ii, lines 29-30 


Briareus was an earthborn monster with fifty heads and a hundred arms. The most important myth in which he figured was one in which the tale of a revolt against Jupiter is central. The other gods, led by Neptune and Apollo, succeed in binding Jupiter, and he might have been overthrown, but for the action of a sea nymph, who hastily brought Briareus to the rescue. The monster untied Jupiter and by his presence cowed the other gods. 
As for Argus, he was a monster with a hundred eyes who was sent by Juno (Hera) in order that he might watch the nymph Io. Io had been one of Jupiter's many loves, and that god had turned her into a heifer to hide her from Juno, but unsuccessfully. Argus' vigilance (his eyes never closed in unison; fifty at least were always open and alert) would prevent Jupiter from ever turning Io back into human form. 
Jupiter sent Mercury (Hermes) to the rescue. Mercury lulled Argus to a simultaneous hundred-eyed sleep with a soothing lullaby and then cut off his head. Juno placed Argus' many eyes in the tail of her favorite bird, the peacock. 
Alexander's description of Ajax, in other words, is that of a man who has all the physical attributes required for a warrior but who lacks the intelligence to make those attributes work for him. 
And, apparently, what bothers Hector is that this mule of a man has struck him down. Hector cannot help but feel the shame of it. 


That's Anterior Ö




Pandarus arrives on the scene and at once begins busily to praise Troilus, hoping to arouse Cressida's ardor. Cressida, who knows exactly what he is doing, teases him unmercifully by never allowing his praises to stand but turning everything on its head. 
Soon the men are returning from the field at the close of the day, and Pandarus decides to let Troilus' own appearance do the talking. He leads Cressida to a place where she can see them, continuing to promise her Troilus, but naming the others as they pass. 
Aeneas passes first and is praised, of course. (Aeneas is always praised-he must be.) Then comes another, and Pandarus says: 


That's Anterior. He has a shrewd wit,I can tell you;

and he's man good enough-he's one

o' the soundest judgments in Troy whosoever. ..





óAct I, scene ii, lines 197-99 


In the Iliad Antenor was one of the elders of Troy. He was a councilor of Priam and a man of good judgment, as Shakespeare says, but far too old to fight. There is undoubtedly confusion here with Agenor, his son, who in the Iliad plays an important role as a Trojan warrior. 


That's Helenus Ö




Pandarus' fussing becomes funnier and funnier. Hector and Paris pass and he praises them with forced enthusiasm, but keeps watching for Troilus and growing constantly more upset because Troilus doesn't appear.
When Cressida asks the name of one of the passing warriors, Pandarus answers absently: 


That's Helenus. 1 marvel where Troilus is.

That's Helenus. I think he went not forth today.

That's Helenus.





óAct I, scene ii, lines 227-29 


Helenus was another son of Priam and Hecuba,, and, according to some accounts, a twin brother of Cassandra. He was likewise blessed with the powers of a soothsayer and was a priest. He was the only one of Priam's sons to survive the fall of Troy (perhaps because of his priestly character) and in the end, according to some of the later tales, married Andromache, Hector's widow. Together they ended their lives ruling over Epirus, a district in northwestern Greece. 


Ö That's Deiphobus




But Cressida is still teasing Pandarus unmercifully. She clearly knows all the men whom Pandarus is identifying. In fact, she sees Troilus before Pandarus does and asks in mock disdain: 


What sneaking fellow comes yonder?





óAct I, scene ii, line 234 


And, at the crisis, Pandarus fails to recognize him after all, saying: 


Where? Yonder? That's Deiphobus.





óAct I, scene ii, line 235 


Only belatedly does he realize it is Troilus. 
Deiphobus is still another son of Priam and Hecuba. After Paris dies in battle, it is he who next marries Helen. As a result, when Troy is taken, he is killed by Menelaus and his corpse is hideously mangled. 
Pandarus makes up for his tardiness in recognizing Troilus by setting up such a caterwauling after him that Cressida is embarrassed; not so embarrassed, however, that she fails to continue her teasing. 
It is only after Pandarus leaves that she reveals in a soliloquy that she is actually in love with Troilus, but holds off because she thinks women are valued only as long as they are not attained. 


Ö after seven years' siege.. .




With the third scene we find ourselves in the Greek camp for the first time. 
There is a general air of depression over the camp and Agamemnon, the commander in chief, is trying to instill heart in the warriors. Their troubles are, after all, long-standing ones, so why be disheartened now? 


Ö is it matter new to us

That we come short of our suppose so far

That after seven years' siege yet Troy walls stand;





-Act I, scene iii, lines 10-12 


If this is the last year of the war, as it must be, then Troy's walls have been standing nine years, not seven-but that is a small error that makes no difference. 
Agamemnon goes on to point out that the difficulty of the task but tests their mettle and tries their worth. 
Agamemnon is in a difficult position, for as commander in chief of the Greek army, the chief odium will fall upon him if the expedition fails. He is commander in chief because he is the king of Mycenae, which at the time of the Trojan War was the chief city of Greece and gave its name to the Mycenaean Age. It declined soon after the Trojan War thanks to the devastation that accompanied the Dorian conquest of much of Greece. It was but a disregarded village in the days of Greece's greatest period, centuries later. 
Mycenae, located in the northeastern Peloponnesus, six miles north of Argos, has been excavated in the last century, and ample evidence has been discovered of past greatness. 
Agamemnon was the grandson of Pelops (see page I-68) and, in theory, he ruled over all of Greece, though in actual fact the princes of northern Greece (Achilles among them) were restive in the face of the claims of leadership on the part of the southern city, Mycenae. 
He was married to Clytemnestra, the daughter of Tyndareus, King of Sparta, a city located some fifty-five miles south of Mycenae. 
The younger sister of Clytemnestra was none other than Helen, over whom the Greeks and Trojans were fighting. Helen's beauty was such that her life, from beginning to end, was one of fatal attraction to men. While she was still a young girl of twelve, she was kidnapped, according to the legends, by the Athenian hero Theseus. She was rescued by her brothers, Castor and Polydeuces, and after she was restored, her father, Tyndareus, decided to marry her off and let her husband have the responsibility of holding her. 
That was easier said than done, for when the word went out that Helen's hand was to be given in marriage, all the heroes of Greece came to Sparta to compete for her. It seemed impossible to choose one without making enemies of all the others. 
It was Ulysses who had the solution. He had no real hope of gaining Helen for himself. He suggested to Tyndareus, therefore, that the competing heroes all be required to take an oath to agree to whatever decision was made as to Helen's husband and to promise to support that husband against anyone who might attempt to take Helen away from him. This was done and Ulysses was rewarded with the hand of Penelope, Helen's cousin. 
It was Menelaus who was chosen as Helen's husband. For one thing, he was wealthy; for another, he was the younger brother of the King of Mycenae, Agamemnon. 
Agamemnon himself could not compete for Helen because he was already married, but he pressed hard on behalf of his younger brother, and it was very likely because of the prestige and pressure of the "Great King" that Menelaus was accepted. 
This was a good stroke of policy on Agamemnon's part. Menelaus succeeded to the throne of Sparta, as Helen's husband. Since Menelaus was a rather passive character, dominated by his more forceful brother, Agamemnon found himself greatly strengthened by his indirect control of the important city of Sparta. 
By the same token, Paris' abduction of Helen was a serious blow to Agamemnon, for it weakened Menelaus' claim on the Spartan throne (which was Helen's rather than his own). Agamemnon had to push hard for a punitive expedition on Troy, and it may have been, again, the influence of the Great King, rather than any vow, which gathered the feudal lords of Greece into the expedition. 
In the Iliad Agamemnon does not shine. His quarrel with Achilles, in which the Great King is entirely in the wrong, nearly wrecks the Greek cause, and on more than one occasion Homer (who is always respectful to him) shows him being deservedly corrected by others. 


Ö Nestor shall apply




When Agamemnon is done, the oldest of the Greek leaders stands up to second his words: 


With due observance of thy godlike seat,

Great Agamemnon, Nestor shall apply Thy latest words.





óAct I, scene iii, lines 31-33


In the Iliad Nestor is active among the Greeks despite the fact that he is described as ruling over the third generation of subjects. Although he is so old, he survives to see Troy sacked. Then, ten years after the fall of that city, when the last of the Greek warriors returns home, Nestor is still alive and still ruling in his city of Pylos on the southwestern shore of Greece. Pylos, like Mycenae, was an important center in the time of the Trojan War, but faded away in later tunes. It left not even a village behind. 
The frequent reference to Nestor's age made some of the Roman writers grant him two hundred years, but that is not really necessary. In the Mycenaean Age it is quite likely that the life expectancy would be no more than twenty-five to thirty years, and that few men would reach forty before violence or disease laid them low. If Nestor was seventy years old at the time of the play he would be ruling over the third generation of men, and even ten years after the fall of Troy, he would be only eighty. 
An occasional person could reach such an age, even in the short-lived times of the ancients, but certainly he would represent a marvel. 
In the Iliad Nestor is shown in the field, driving his chariot. He does not actually engage in combat, but he is always there overseeing his forces. What's more, he is constantly giving advice in long-winded speeches, and although no one in the Iliad ever indicates that he is bored by Nestor, it seems clear that Nestor is a bore just the same. He is forever recalling the feats of his youth and one gets the idea that the same feats must surely have been recalled over and over again. The old man seems more obviously a bore in Shakespeare's version. 


The gentle Thetis Ö




Nestor seconds Agamemnon's views. The old man points out that any-} one can succeed when the task is easy, but that great enterprises call out the best in man. On calm seas, any ship can sail, but on stormy seas, it is the strong vessel that makes its mark. Nestor says: 


But let the ruffian Boreas once enrage

The gentle Thetis, and anon behold

The strong-ribbed bark through liquid mountains cut,

Bounding between the two moist elements

Like Perseus' horse,





óAct I, scene iii, lines 38-42 


Boreas is the personification of the north wind and Thetis is used here as the personification of the ocean, but that is wrong. There is common confusion between Thetis and Tethys. The latter was a Titaness and the wife of Oceanus (who is clearly the god of the ocean), so that Tethys can serve as a feminine version of the personification. 
Thetis, in her own right, plays an important role in the Greek myths and in the Iliad particularly. She is a sea nymph (all the easier to confuse her with Tethys) and it was she who brought Briareus to the rescue of Jupiter (see page I-86). 
Thetis' beauty was such that both Jupiter and Neptune tried to win her, until they found out she was fated to have a son stronger than his father. It was unsafe for either god, or any god, to marry her in that case, and she was forced to marry a mortal. The mortal chosen was a Thessalian prince named Peleus, and at the marriage (pushed through much against the will of Thetis) all the gods and goddesses assembled. 
It was at this wedding that Eris appeared with her Apple of Discord. What's more, born of this marriage was Achilles, who was, indeed, far stronger than his father Peleus. 
In the Iliad Thetis makes several appearances in her role as Achilles' mother, bewailing the fact that her son was fated to endless glory but short life. 
The reference to Perseus' horse is to the famous winged stallion Pegasus. Perseus was a Greek hero in the generations before the Trojan War, whose great feat was the destruction of Medusa, one of the three Gorgons, whose appearance was so fearful that they turned to stone anyone who looked at them. With divine help, Perseus was able to cut off the head of Medusa. The blood that dripped from it, on striking the ground, gave rise to Pegasus, who leaped up at once and winged his way into the sky. In that sense, he was Perseus' horse, though there was no further connection between the two. 


Ö hear Ulysses speak




When Nestor is finished, the shrewdest of the Greeks arises, and addressing the two preceding speakers says: 


Ö let it please both Thou great, and wise,

to hear Ulysses speak.





óAct I, scene iii, lines 68-69 


As Nestor is the very personification of the rather tedious wisdom of age, so Ulysses (Odysseus) is the very personification of shrewdness and clever, but not always ethical, strategy. This comes out even better in Homer's companion poem, the Odyssey, which deals with Ulysses' return home after the fall of Troy, and of the ten years of adventures he survives through cleverness and endurance. 
The later tales of the Troy cycle attributed to Ulysses all the clever stratagems devised by the Greeks, notably that of the wooden horse itself, with which the fall of Troy was finally encompassed. Since cleverness easily degenerates into slyness and rascality, some of the later myths picture Ulysses as a deceitful coward. None of that, however, appears anywhere in Homer, where Ulysses is depicted as uniformly admirable. Nor does it appear in Shakespeare's play. 


Ö Prince of Ithaca




Agamemnon says at once: 


Speak, Prince of Ithaca;





óAct I, scene iii, line 70 


Ithaca is the home island of Ulysses; its exact location is not certain. Indeed, it has been an interesting game among classical scholars to try to determine which Greek island it might be from the descriptions given in the Odyssey. 
The general feeling is that it is one of the Ionian Islands off the west coast of Greece. The particular island (called "Ithake" on modern maps) is small, only thirty-six square miles in area, and some twenty miles from the mainland. It is surrounded by larger islands, which presumably also represented part of Ulysses' domain. 


Ö rank Thersites Ö




Agamemnon states that there is as much chance that Ulysses will utter folly as that: 


When rank Thersites opes his mastic jaws,

We shall hear music, wit, and oracle.





óAct I, scene iii, lines 73-74 


Thersites plays one small part in the Iliad. He is the only common man, the only non-aristocrat, mentioned by name, and Homer has a field day at his expense, describing him as: "-a certain Thersites, who had no control over his tongue, and poured out an endless stream of abuse against his superiors, saying whatever came into his head that might raise a laugh. Thersites was by far the ugliest man in the Greek army: bandylegged, lame, hump-backed, crook-necked and bald." 
His appearance is in Book Two, where as a result of a miscalculation by Agamemnon, the Greek army is about to break up and make for home. Ulysses is desperately trying to stop them when Thersites breaks into invective against Agamemnon and keeps it up until he is stopped by a blow from Ulysses and some stern words. 
That is all! It must be remembered that the Iliad was written about aristocrats and for an aristocratic audience, and, moreover, that it was aristocratic patronage that kept bards in comfort. Homer and those like him could scarcely afford to portray a common man successfully running down warriors and noblemen. 
And yet, if one reads Thersites' speech in the one scene given him, it makes good sense. He scolds Agamemnon for hogging the best of the loot and for offending Achilles, on whom the Greek victory most depends. It was all true enough, and the blow he received did not alter that fact. Homer may have been having his moment of grim fun with the aristocrats. 
Shakespeare, who was likewise patronized by aristocrats and who likewise rarely showed the common people in a good light, adopted Thersites as part of the comic relief in the play, though it is black comedy indeed. Thersites' mastic (that is, abusive) jaws never open without spewing out untold bitterness, and we are prepared for that in this comment of Agamemnon's. 


Ö the glorious planet Sol




Ulysses points out that the trouble with the Greek force rests in its divisions, the existence within it of factions that neutralize its efforts. This lack of central authority, he maintains, is against nature itself, for inanimate nature shows the beneficial effects of order even in the heavens, where the planets move through the sky in strict accordance with certain rules: 


And therefore is the glorious planet

Sol In noble eminence enthroned and sphered

Amidst the other; whose med'cinable eye

Corrects the influence of evil planets,





óAct I, scene iii, lines 89-92 


"Sol" is the Latin word for "sun" and is the personification of the sun in the Roman myths. 
This passage sounds as though Shakespeare, through Ulysses' mouth, is proclaiming the sun to be the ruler of the planets, for he is "in noble eminence enthroned" and he governs and controls the others. 
If so, this is a startlingly modern view, not only for Ulysses, but even for Shakespeare, for it seems to refer to the heliocentric theory of the solar system, which places the sun at the center and makes the planets (including the earth itself) revolve about it. The mere fact that the sun is at the center would make it appear to rule the planetary system (so that it is a solar system), and Isaac Newton eventually showed, some sixty-seven years after Shakespeare's death, that the sun's overwhelming gravitational force did, indeed, keep the planets in their place. 
It is surprising that Shakespeare should seem to be giving this impression, for all through his plays he shows himself a complete conservative as far as science is concerned and accepts only the Greek view of the universe. To be sure, some Greeks, notably Aristarchus of Samos, about 250 b.c., claimed the sun was the center of the planetary system, but few listened to them, and the Greek majority view continued to place the earth at the center. This latter doctrine was made final by the grand synthesis of the astronomer Ptolemy, about a.d. 150. (The earth-at-center theory is therefore called the "Ptolemaic system" in consequence.) 
In 1543 Copernicus advanced the same notion that Aristarchus once had, but with much more detailed reasoning. His view was not accepted by most scholars for a long time, and in Shakespeare's lifetime the Copernican view was still widely considered rather far out and blasphemous. 
Can Shakespeare, then, be taking the progressive Copernican view against the conservative Ptolemaic attitude? 
No! That he remains conservative is clear at several points. He refers, for instance, to the "planet Sol." The Greeks observed that several heavenly bodies shifted position constantly against the background of non-shifting of "fixed" stars. These bodies they called "planets," meaning, in English, "wanderers." The known planets included the sun, the moon, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn, seven bodies in all. 
Once the Copernican view of the planetary system was established, it seemed unreasonable to call the sun a planet, since it didn't wander among the stars, really, but was thought to be the motionless center of the planetary system. 
It fell out of fashion to call the sun a planet, therefore. The name "planet" was then applied only to those bodies which revolved about the sun. This meant that the earth itself would have to be viewed as a planet. The moon revolves about the earth, the only body to retain its Ptolemaic position, and it is not, strictly speaking, viewed as a planet any longer. It is a satellite. Of the Greek planets, therefore, only Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn retain the name and to these are added the earth and the planetary bodies since discovered: Uranus, Neptune, Pluto, and a host of tiny bodies called planetoids or asteroids. 
Shakespeare refers to Sol as a planet, however, thus insisting that the sun moves and is not the center of the planetary system. He has the sun not merely enthroned but also "sphered." That is, it is embedded in a sphere that encircles the earth (see page I-25), whereas if it were the center of the planetary system, it could not be part of a sphere. 
Finally, in speaking of the necessity of order in the heavens, Shakespeare has Ulysses say, a bit earlier in the speech: 


The heavens themselves, the planets, and this center

Observe degree, priority, and place.





óAct I, scene iii, lines 85-86 


That makes a clear distinction between the planets and "this center," that is, earth. 
If the sun is "in noble eminence enthroned," then, it is only because, in Shakespeare's view, it is the brightest and most magnificent of the planets and not because it has a central position. 


In evil mixture Ö




Ulysses goes on to point out the harmful effects of disorder in the heavens: 


But when the planets

In evil mixture to disorder wander,

What plagues, and what portents, what mutiny,





óAct I, scene iii, lines 94-96 


This seems to reflect the universal belief in astrology in Greek times, in Shakespeare's times, and, for that matter, in our own times. The planets were supposed to influence matters on earth by their ever changing positions against the stars and relative to each other. Certain positions foreboded evil and therefore represented "the planets in evil mixture." 
And yet the motions of the planets followed a fixed pattern that could be worked out, and was worked out, by Greek astronomers (a thousand years after the Trojan War, to be sure) so that such "evil mixture" could not really represent disorder. They followed inevitably from planetary motion. 
There were, however, some heavenly phenomena which were very spectacular and which took place only rarely; notably eclipses of the sun and of the moon. These therefore were particularly baleful and frightening, and remained signs of apparent disorder in the heavens even after they had been explained astronomically and had been proven to be predictable. 
Still more frightening and disorderly were the occasional appearances of comets, whose comings and goings seemed utterly erratic and were shown to be governed by the sun's gravitational field only two centuries after Shakespeare's death. 


The great Achilles Ö




Having established (most eloquently) the general principle that only in centralized authority accepted by all, only in an established hierarchy of mastery, is order and efficiency to be found, Ulysses descends to specifics. Agamemnon should be the autocratic head of the enterprise against Troy, but his subordinates flout him and, in particular: 


The great Achilles, whom opinion crowns

The sinew and the forehand of our host,

Having his ear full of his airy fame,

Grows dainty of his worth, and in his tent

Lies mocking our designs.





óAct I, scene iii, lines 142-46 


Achilles was certainly the foremost hero on the Greek side and in the Iliad he is by no means treated as a conceited fop. Before the poem opens, he has been the mainstay of the army; his expeditions have subdued the Trojan dominions in Asia Minor; he has fought harder than anyone. 
It is only when Agamemnon tries to take away his lawful prize, the girl Briseis, and scorns him before the gathered army, that Achilles loses his temper and withdraws from the fight. He proves himself to be vengeful and cruel thereafter, but at least he has a reasonable cause for his anger. 
In Roman and medieval times, however, the legend of the Roman descent from Aeneas swung popular opinion heavily in favor of the Trojans. Achilles was therefore downgraded and there seemed nothing wrong in having him sulk in his tent out of vainglorious conceit, rather than in righteous wrath. Furthermore, the proponents of courtly love did not fail to make use of later myths concerning Achilles' love for a Trojan princess. That will appear later in the play as a cause for his malingering. 


Ö With him Patroclus




Nor is Achilles alone. He has a friend: 


With him Patroclus

Upon a lazy bed the livelong day

Breaks scurril jests,





óAct I, scene iii, lines 146-48


Patroclus is one of the important characters in the Iliad and is pictured there as the bosom friend of Achilles. Homer makes nothing of the relationship beyond that of loving friendship, but the later Greeks casually assumed more. They saw nothing wrong in homosexuality and even felt it to be a superior form of love. Consequently they had no hesitation in seeing Achilles and Patroclus as lovers in the literal sense of the word. This did not prevent Patroclus from being portrayed as a noble character (indeed, the gentlest of the Greeks) and a brave warrior. 
In Christian Europe, however, homosexuality was an abomination and the Greek outlook could not be retained on its own terms. Shakespeare is forced to present Patroclus as effeminate, though he does not deprive him of all our sympathy either. 


Ö roaring Typhon Ö




Ulysses is offended at the fact that Patroclus mimics the Greek leaders for Achilles' amusement. Vehemently, Ulysses insists that the imitations are poor ones, though he does not hesitate to describe them with a realism that must surely be sufficient to embarrass the ones being imitated. 
He describes Patroclus pretending to be Agamemnon, for instance, with an affectation of great self-importance and melodramatic language (undoubtedly not too much an exaggeration of the way Agamemnon should be played). The language Patroclus uses, says Ulysses indignantly, is so ridiculously exaggerated that: 


Ö from the tongue of roaring Typhon dropped,

Would seem hyperboles.





óAct I, scene iii, lines 160-61 


Typhon, in the Greek myths, was the largest monster ever born. His arms were a hundred miles long, his legs were serpents, his eyes flashed fire, and his mouth spewed forth flaming rocks. He may have been a personification of a volcano or, possibly, of a hurricane. 
The gods themselves fled in terror before him and he was even able to capture Jupiter and for a while incapacitate him. Typhon was, however, eventually defeated and buried under Mount Etna, the largest and most fearsome volcano known to the ancient world. 
Whether volcano or hurricane, it is clear that Typhon had a roaring voice, and that is the point of the metaphor.


Ö Vulcan and his wife




Ulysses next describes Patroclus imitating Nestor getting ready to speak, or to answer a night alarm, meticulously demonstrating how he acts the old, old man (again presumably very much the way Nestor is really acted). And Ulysses says indignantly: 


That's done, as near as the extremest ends

Of parallels, as like as Vulcan and his wife,





óAct I, scene iii, lines 167-68 


Since parallels never meet, they can be extended infinitely in either direction. The imitation is as far from reality, Ulysses' words are saying, as is an infinite distance in one direction from an infinite distance in the other. The other comparison of opposites is Vulcan (Hephaestus) and his wife, Venus (see page I-11). 


He hath a lady. ..




Ulysses does not go on to say that Patroclus imitates Ulysses as well, but one can easily imagine he does and that that is what really annoys the Ithacan. 
But further discussion is interrupted by a messenger who arrives from Troy. It is Aeneas, debonair and gay, bringing a challenge from Hector, offering single combat with any Greek. As a cause for combat, he sends a message which Aeneas delivers as: 


He hath a lady wiser, fairer, truer,

Than ever Greek did compass in his arms;





óAct I, scene iii, lines 275-76 


This is straight out of the medieval tales, when knights were supposed to fight in the names of their ladies in accord with the rules of courtly love (see page I-54). Agamemnon rises to the occasion, following the silly conventions on his own account, saying: 


This shall be told our lovers, Lord Aeneas;

If none of them have soul in such a kind,

We left them all at home. But we are soldiers;

And may that soldier a mere recreant prove,

That means not, hath not, or is not in love!





óAct I, scene iii, lines 284-88


It is hard to believe that such lines can be read seriously in surroundings that even hint at the grandeur with which Homer surrounded the Trojan War. 


Ö the great Myrmidon




Agamemnon leads Aeneas off to carry the challenge to the various tents, but it is clear that it is meant for Achilles. 
When he is gone, Ulysses huddles with Nestor. Ulysses has an idea-Why send Achilles against Hector? Suppose by some accident Achilles is wounded. With Achilles known to be their best man, that would be disastrous. 
If, on the other hand, someone other than Achilles is sent, and loses, it will still be taken for granted that Achilles would have won if he had fought. On the other hand, if the lesser man should win, not only would that be a terrific gain for the Greeks, but Achilles himself, suddenly finding himself in second place behind a new champion, would leave off his posturing and laziness and would buckle down to the serious business of fighting. Ulysses' advice is that they: 


Ö make a lott'ry;

And by device let blockish Ajax draw

The sort to fight with Hector; among ourselves

Give him allowance for the better man,

For that will physic the great Myrmidon

Who broils in loud applause, and make him fall

His crest that prouder than blue Iris bends.





óAct I, scene iii, lines 373-79 


At the start of Book Seven of the Iliad, Hector does challenge the Greek champions, though not with a silly make-believe excuse involving courtly love. Several Greek champions did accept the challenge, lots were drawn, and the choice did fall on Ajax, though Homer makes no mention of any device to do so. 
As for the Myrmidons, they were a tribe in Phthia in southern Thessaly over whom Achilles ruled, hence the reference to him as "the great Myrmidon." The word seems to contain the Greek myrmex, meaning "ant," and the ancient mythmakers invented an explanation for this. 
Aeacus, the grandfather of Achilles, ruled the small island of Aegina near Athens. Either it was not populated to begin with or its population was destroyed by a plague. In either case, Aeacus prayed to Zeus that he be given men to rule and in response the god converted the ants on the island into men. These Myrmidons followed Aeacus' son, Peleus, to Thessaly and from there a contingent went with Peleus' son, Achilles, to the Trojan War. 
Iris is usually the personification of the rainbow (see page I-67), but here she is used to represent the sky generally. 


I.. as Cerberus




Now we are ready to have our first glimpse of Ajax and Thersites. A proclamation has been posted concerning Hector's challenge and Ajax wants to know what it says. Since Ajax is illiterate, he must ask Thersites to read it for him and Thersites is not in an obliging mood. (He never is.) 
Thersites scolds Ajax most viciously and eloquently and Ajax, who can speak only with his fists, uses those as arguments. Thersites strikes back (with words) where he knows it will hurt most, saying: 


Thou grumblest and railest every hour on Achilles, and thou

art as full of envy at his greatness as Cerberus is at Proser

pina's beautyÖ





óAct II, scene i, lines 33-35 


Cerberus is the ugly, slavering, three-headed dog that guards the gateway to the underground abode of the dead, serving to prevent any living from invading those regions and any of the dead from escaping. Proserpina, on the other hand, is the beautiful queen of the underworld, the daughter of Ceres, whom Hades had carried off (see page I-7). 


Ö Achilles' brach Ö




Achilles and Patroclus come on the scene and prevent Ajax from striking Thersites further. Achilles is clearly amused at Thersites and encourages him to continue his scurrilous comments concerning Ajax, to the latter's huge annoyance. Nor does Thersites spare Achilles himself, and when the gentle Patroclus tries to quiet the lowborn railer, Thersites says, sarcastically: 


/ will hold my peace when Achilles'

brach bids me, shall I?





óAct II, scene i, lines 119-20 


"Brach" is an archaic word for a bitch and Patroclus is thus compared with a female animal. This is one of the few explicit and contemptuous references to homosexuality to be found in Shakespeare.
Thersites then departs, leaving Achilles to read the news of Hector's challenge to Ajax (pretending to care little about the matter for himself). 


Ö Let Helen go




In the Iliad, the duel between Ajax and Hector takes up a good portion of Book Seven. It ends with both champions alive but with Hector having had clearly the worst of it. (This is reflected in the earlier statement in Troilus and Cressida that Ajax had beaten Hector down on one occasion, see page I-87.) 
At the end of the duel, therefore, it is reasonable that the disheartened Trojans hold a conference and consider whether or not to offer to give up Helen, pay an indemnity, and buy off the Greeks. Antenor counsels this line of action, but Paris insists he will not give up Helen, and when the offer of an indemnity without Helen is made, the Greeks (heartened by Ajax's showing) refuse, so the war goes on. 
Shakespeare changes this. Hector's challenge has been issued and it has not yet been taken up, yet the Trojans are now seen in council trying to reach an important decision. Nestor, on behalf of the Greeks, has offered to end the war if the Trojans surrender Helen and pay an indemnity. It seems unreasonable to suppose that the Greeks would make such an offer or the Trojans consider one while the issue of the duel remained in doubt. 
Yet the council proceedings are presented. In Shakespeare, it is Hector who makes the plea for a peace even at the price of a virtual surrender, saying in part: 


Ö modest doubt is called

The beacon of the wise, the tent that searches

To the bottom of the worst. Let Helen go.





óAct II, scene ii, lines 15-17 


This is in character for Shakespeare's Hector and for Homer's Hector too. In the Iliad Hector is never pictured as a fire-eater for the sake of battle. He is pictured as knowing well that Troy is in the wrong and that Paris' abduction is indefensible, but he fights because Troy is his city. He is a fighter in a poor cause, but his own character enforces respect nevertheless. 


Ö for an old auntÖ




Paris argues the hawkish view in the Iliad, but it is Troilus who speaks first here. He points out that it was the Trojans who first suffered loss at the hands of the Greeks and that the abduction of Helen was but a retaliation that all the Trojans favored at the time it was carried through. He goes on to describe Paris' retaliation: 


And for an old aunt whom the Greeks held captive

He brought a Grecian queen, whose youth and freshness

Wrinkles Apollo's and makes pale the morning.





óAct II, scene ii, lines 77-79 


The "old aunt" is Hesione, a sister of King Priam. When Hercules captured and sacked Troy, he carried off Hesione into captivity. She was never returned despite Trojan demands. 
The capture of Hesione plays no part in the Homeric tale, and the abduction of Helen could, in any case, never be viewed as a fair return for an earlier outrage. Hesione was captured as a war prisoner, and however deplorable we consider such things now, this was considered legitimate in ancient times. Paris, on the other hand, had taken Helen not as the spoils of war, but by treachery and at the cost of violating what was due his host, Menelaus, who was entertaining him with all hospitality. The two actions simply weren't comparable. 
The tale of Hesione has another point of impingement on the tale of Troy. She was awarded to Telamon, the brother of Peleus. By her, Tela-mon had a son named Teucer, who is therefore first cousin to Achilles. Teucer does not appear in Troilus and Cressida but he does appear in the Iliad as a skilled archer. 
Telamon, by a previous wife (an Athenian woman), had another son, who was none other than Ajax. Ajax is therefore first cousin to Achilles and half brother to Teucer. In the Iliad Teucer is always fighting at the side of Ajax and the two half brothers are devoted to each other. 
Teucer, notice, is half Trojan through his mother and is actually a nephew of Priam and a first cousin to Hector, Troilus, Paris, and the rest, as well as to Achilles. At the beginning of the play, when Ajax is first mentioned to Cressida, he is described as "a lord of Troyan blood, nephew to Hector," which he isn't. The confusion is with Teucer, who is a lord of Trojan blood, cousin to Hector. 


Our firebrand brother Ö




The council is interrupted by Cassandra, Priam's mad daughter, whose prophecies are always true, but never believed. She wails: 


Cry, Troyans, cry! Practice your eyes with tears!

Troy must not be, nor goodly Ilion stand;

Our firebrand brother, Paris, burns us all.





-Act II, scene ii, lines 108-10 


Just before Paris was born (according to legends that play no part in the Iliad) Hecuba dreamed she was delivered of a burning firebrand. A soothsayer, when consulted, said that this meant that Troy would be burned and destroyed because of the child about to be born. He urged that the child be killed as soon as born. 
Priam, unable to bring himself to do the job or witness its being done, had a herdsman take the child, instructing him to kill it The herdsman could not do it either, but exposed the child in an uninhabited place. There it was found by a she-bear, which suckled it. 
The herdsman, finding the child alive when he returned after some days, decided to bring it up as his own son, and it was while the young man was engaged in herding that the three goddesses Juno, Minerva, and Venus came down to have him decide which was the most beautiful. 
After this, Paris, still in his role as herdsman, entered certain games being held in Troy, did marvelously well, even against Hector, and was recognized by Cassandra as the long-lost Paris. There was no thought of killing him; he was restored to his royal position and, eventually, proved his title to the firebrand dream by sailing to Sparta and abducting Helen. 


Ö whom Aristotle Ö




Hector refers to Cassandra's cries as proof that Helen ought to be returned and the war ended, but Cassandra is simply dismissed as mad by Troilus. Paris rises and places himself on Troilus' side. 
Hector is not convinced. He says his two younger brothers argue: 


Ö but superficially: not much

Unlike young men, whom Aristotle thought

Unfit to hear moral philosophy.





óAct II, scene ii, lines 165-67 


This is, actually, one of the most amusing anachronisms in Shakespeare. The dramatist forgets, for the moment, that he is discussing a war that took place in 1200 b.c., and has Hector refer to a philosopher who died in 322 b.c.-rune centuries later. 
And yet, although Hector denigrates the arguments of Troilus and Paris, he cannot manage to stand against the kind of arguments that refer to such abstractions as honor, glory, and patriotism. It is decided (as in the Iliad) to keep Helen and let the war go on. 


Ö thy caduceusÖ




The scene shifts back to the Greek camp, where Thersites, standing outside Achilles' tent, is brooding over his recent beating by Ajax. He inveighs against the stupidity of both heroes, Achilles as well as Ajax, and invokes the vengeance of the gods upon them, saying: 


O thou great thunder-darter of Olympus,

forget that thou art Jove, the king of gods;

and, Mercury, lose all the serpentine craft of thy caduceus,

if ye take not that little, little,

less than little wit from them that they have;





óAct II, scene iii, lines 10-14 


Jupiter (Zeus) was, in all likelihood, a storm god originally. His home would naturally be on a mountaintop where the clouds gather. Olympus was the one chosen by the Greeks, and it was a logical choice, for it is the highest mountain in Greece-although not so terribly high at that, only 1.8 miles. It is located in northern Thessaly, about 170 miles northwest of Athens. 
As a storm god, Jupiter would naturally be in charge of the lightning. He would therefore be a thunder-darter, or, more correctly, a thunderbolt-darter. 
Mercury (Hermes) was, in many myths, the messenger of the gods, a kind of male version of Iris (see page I-67). It is because of Mercury's swiftness in fulfilling his errands that he is usually pictured with small wings on his sandals and hat. 
In carrying the messages of Jupiter, he was acting as Jupiter's herald or substitute and therefore carried with him the aura of Jupiter's majesty. In token of that he carried a staff, as earthly heralds did. In earliest times, the staff may have had flexible twigs at the end which would be wound back over the body of the staff. 
In later times, these twigs, shown in representations of Mercury and misunderstood, became serpents. It is this serpent-bound staff, called the caduceus, which became a characteristic mark of Mercury. The caduceus was further confused in still later times with a magical wand, the agent by which Mercury, at the behest of Jupiter, brought about supernatural effects. Thersites therefore speaks of the "craft of thy caduceus."


Ö the Neapolitan bone-ache.. .




Having wished evil on Ajax and Achilles specifically, Thersites goes on to curse the Greeks generally: 


After this, the vengeance on the whole camp!

Or, rather, the Neapolitan bone-ache, for that,

methinks, is the curse depending on those that war for a placket.





óAct II, scene iii, lines 18-21 


The "Neapolitan bone-ache" is syphilis. This was not recognized as a serious, contagious disease until the early sixteenth century. Indeed, the story arose that it first appeared in Italy during battles at which some of Columbus' sailors were present. It therefore seemed that those sailors had picked up syphilis in the New World from the Indians and brought it back to Europe. (Europe sent the Indians smallpox in return.) 
This may not be so and the disease may have occurred in Europe earlier, and been considered one of the forms of leprosy, perhaps; but if so, syphilis occurred less frequently then and less virulently. If the sixteenth century did not find it a new disease, it found it at least a more serious version of an old one, and it still required a new name. 
This was difficult to find, for it was early recognized that contagion most easily resulted through sexual intercourse, so that it became shameful to admit the disease or even discuss it. It was natural for any group to consider it characteristic of a neighboring group. The French, for instance, would call it the "Neapolitan bone-ache," while the Italians would call it the "French disease." 
In 1530 an Italian physician, Girolamo Fracastoro, wrote a Lathi epic poem which was a mock myth about a shepherd who offended Apollo and who fell victim to what Fracastoro called the "French disease." The shepherd's name was the Greek-sounding one (but not real Greek) of Syphilis, and it is this which gave the present name to the disease. 
In Shakespeare's time the disease was still less than a century old in European consciousness. It had the doubtful virtue of novelty and of being associated with sex. Any reference to it, then, was good for a laugh, especially if it was arranged to have the laugh at the expense of foreigners. Thersites not only affixes it to the Neapolitans (making the reference doubly anachronistic, since Naples was not to be founded till some five centuries after the Trojan War) but makes use of the sexual angle as well by insisting it is to be what is expected for any army that wars for a placket (a petticoat, and therefore a coarse term for a woman). 
References to syphilis abound in Shakespeare, usually at the expense of the French, but since moderns don't find the subject as humorous as the Elizabethans did, I shall pick up such references as infrequently as I can.


Ö a privileged man Ö




Thersites assumes, in this scene, a totally un-Homeric role. He is a jester; a man of quick wit (or perhaps slightly addled brains) whose remarks and responses are a source of amusement. He had apparently fulfilled that function for Ajax but Ajax had beaten him and he was now seeking employment with Achilles instead. 
In return for amusing his master (in days when amusement was not yet electronified and easy to come by at the flick of a dial) a jester was allowed extraordinary leeway in his mockery and much more freedom of speech than anyone else might have. Naturally, this worked best when the jester's patron was powerful and could suppress the hurt feelings of underlings who might otherwise break the jester's neck. 
Thus, when Thersites begins to perform for Achilles, Patroclus reacts with the beginnings of violence to one of Thersites' scurrilous remarks and Achilles restrains him by saying: 


He is a privileged man. Proceed, Thersites.





-Act II, scene iii, line 59 


Such a jester was often called a "fool" and many a Shakespearean play has someone listed as "Fool" in the cast of characters. This was not necessarily because they were foolish, but because very often they hid their sharp satire behind oblique comments in such a way that the points were not immediately apparent and therefore seemed foolish to the dull-witted. It also helped keep the jester from broken bones if he played the fool so that those he mocked might not be certain whether his remarks were deliberately hurtful or whether they were perhaps just the aimless maunderings of a lackwit. 
Thersites is given this name a little later in the scene when Ajax is inveighing against Achilles and Nestor is surprised at the spleen of those remarks. Ulysses explains: 


Achilles hath inveigled his fool from him.





óAct II, scene iii, line 93 


Ö and a cuckoldÖ




Thersites' bitter jesting for the benefit of Achilles, and largely at the expense of Patroclus, is interrupted by the arrival of a deputation from the Greeks. Achilles promptly retires into the tent, unwilling to talk to them, and before leaving himself, Thersites expresses his opinion of both sides of this inter-Greek friction:


Here is such patchery, such juggling, and such knavery.

All the argument is a whore and a cuckoldÖ





óAct II, scene iii, lines 73-75 


The whore is Helen, of course, and the cuckold (that is, the deceived husband) is Menelaus. 
Why cuckold? The word is a form of "cuckoo." The common European species of cuckoo lays its egg in the nest of another and smaller bird, leaving to the foster parents the task of rearing the cuckoo fledgling. The male adulterer also lays his egg in the nest of another, to use the ribald analogy that must have occurred as long ago as Roman times, for the Romans called an adulterer a "cuckoo." The word shifted to "cuckold" and the name passed from the adulterer to the adulterer's victim. The name, or any guarded reference to it, was as sure-fire a source of laughter in Elizabethan times as any remark concerning horns (see page I-84). 


Ö rely on none




The deputation of Greeks who have arrived at Achilles' tent intend to urge him to fight more vigorously. 
This parallels, in a way, Book Nine of the Iliad, where the Greeks, having had some trouble in an immediately preceding battle, gloomily anticipate more and decide to try to win over Achilles once again. 
A deputation of three, Ajax, Ulysses and Phoenix (the last an old tutor of Achilles), are sent. They offer to return the girl Agamemnon took from Achilles, together with additional rich gifts as compensation for Achilles' humiliation. By now, however, Achilles has so consumed himself with anger that he prefers his grievance to all else and he absolutely refuses. 
In the Iliad Achilles puts himself in the wrong at this point, so that in the end he will have to suffer too, as well as Agamemnon and his Greek army. But if Achilles puts himself in the wrong, he does it at least in a grand fashion. 
In Troilus and Cressida Achilles can offer nothing but petulance. Ulysses enters the tent and emerges to say that Achilles will not fight. When Agamemnon asks the reason, Ulysses replies: 


He doth rely on none,





óAct II, scene iii, line 165 


This is mere sulkiness, or, as it turns out later, lovesickness and treason, which is even worse. Shakespeare thus continues his Trojan-biased downgrading of the Homeric picture of the great Greek hero. 


Ö more coals to CancerÖ




It is time for the Greeks to make do without Achilles as best they can, obviously, and they begin to flatter Ajax into accepting the duel with Hector. 
Thus, when Agamemnon suggests that Ajax be sent into the tent to plead with Achilles, Ulysses demurs grandiloquently and says that Achilles is not worth so great an honor as having a man like Ajax demur to him: 


That were to enlard his fat-already pride,

And add more coals to Cancer when he burns

With entertaining great Hyperion.





óAct II, scene iii, lines 197-99


Hyperion (the sun, see page I-11) makes a complete round of the sky against the background of the stars in the course of one year. The stars in its path are divided into twelve constellations, which, all together, make up the Zodiac. (This is from a Greek phrase meaning "circle of animals" because so many of the constellations are visualized as animals.) 
On June 21 the sun enters the sign of Cancer (the Crab) and summer starts on that day. Ulysses refers to summer heat in the notion of Cancer burning because of the entry of great Hyperion. Ajax kowtowing to Achilles would but make summer heat hotter; that is, it would make proud Achilles prouder. 


Bull-bearing Milo. ..




The flattery grows grosser and grosser and Ajax, delighted, accepts it all. Ulysses says, in praise of Ajax: 


Ö for thy vigor,

Bull-bearing Milo his addition yield

To sinewy Ajax.





óAct II, scene iii, lines 247-49 


Milo was an athlete of Croton, a city on the coast of the Italian toe, whose feats of strength had grown legendary. The most famous tale was that he lifted a particular calf onto his shoulders every day. It grew heavier with age, of course, and finally Milo was lifting a full-grown bull. This was the reason for his addition (that is, tide) of "Bull-bearing," a title which, Ulysses was saying, he would now have to yield to Ajax. 
This is another anachronism, of course, almost as bad as the one about Aristotle. Milo was not a myth but an actual historical figure (though the stories about him might be exaggerated, to be sure). He died about 500 b.c., seven centuries after the Trojan War.


Fresh kingsÖ




Ajax is now thoroughly softened up and has played the scene as an utter puppet in the hands of Ulysses. This is completely unclassical, for Ajax is a truly heroic figure in the Iliad and was viewed as a sympathetic and tragic figure in later tales. Partly this was because he was considered an Athenian, for he was from the small island of Salamis, which, in the century when the Iliad was edited into its final form, had just been annexed by Athens. 
Yet there is an echo of the classic too. After Achilles' death there was a competition for his armor, which narrowed down to Ulysses and Ajax. Ulysses won out and Ajax, in grief and shame, went mad. Ajax, it would seem, in one way or another, is always at the mercy of Ulysses. 
This part of the task done, Ulysses now suggests that Agamemnon call a council of war, at which the arrangement to put up Ajax against Hector be completed. He says: 


Please it our great general

To call together all his state of war;

Fresh kings are come to Troy.





óAct II, scene iii, lines 260-62 


It would not have been reasonable to suppose that the city of Troy, all by itself, could have withstood a huge expeditionary force of a united Greece. Rather, it stood at the head of a large combination of forces itself. The tribes of Asia Minor stood with it and one of the most prominent Trojan heroes in the Iliad was Sarpedon, a prince of Lycia in southwestern Asia Minor, some three hundred miles south of Troy. He does not appear in Troilus and Cressida, but Pandarus, who does, is also a Lycian-at least in the Iliad. 
In Book Ten of the Iliad, immediately after the unsuccessful deputation to Achilles, there is, indeed, the tale of a new reinforcement of the Trojans. This is Rhesus, a Thracian king who has led both men and horses to the aid of the Trojans. Thrace is in Europe, to be sure, but it lies to the northeast of Greece and was inhabited by non-Greeks. (Nor did it ever become Greek in the future. It is the region that makes up the modern kingdom of Bulgaria.) 
In the Iliad Ulysses and Diomedes sneak into the Trojan camp under the cover of night and assassinate Rhesus, nullifying the effect of his reinforcement, but nothing of the sort takes place in Troilus and Cressida. The reference to fresh kings coming to Troy is all that is left.


O Cupid, Cupid, Cupid




As Act Three opens, Pandarus has finally made arrangements to bring Troilus and Cressida together for a night and has come to Priam's palace to persuade Paris to cover for Troilus, so that no one may suspect where the young prince is. 
This gives Shakespeare a chance to place Helen herself on stage-in one scene only. 
In the Iliad Helen's beauty is made overwhelming. All are victims of it and all are affected by it. Homer places her praise, with exceeding effectiveness, in the mouths of the old men of Troy, showing that even impotent age feels the influence. He says: 
"At Helen's approach, these grey-beards muttered earnestly among themselves. 'How entrancing she is! Like an immortal goddess! Yes, marvellously like one! I cannot blame the Trojans and Greeks for battling over her so bitterly!'" 
And Helen is her own victim too. She is conscious of herself as the cause of immense misery; she is contrite and ashamed, and, in the same scene referred to above, she says to Priam: 
" 'I ought to have died before eloping with Prince Paris-imagine, leaving my home, my family, my unmarried daughter, and so many women friends of my own age! But leave them I did, and now I weep for remorseÖ Oh, I am a shameless bitch, if ever there was one.'" 
Furthermore, Helen is intelligent and in the Odyssey, when, ten years after the fall of Troy, she is once again the wife of Menelaus and the two are entertaining the son of Ulysses in their home, Helen is clearly more quick-witted than her husband. 
But how does Shakespeare present Helen in the one scene in which she appears? She appears as a vain, silly woman, with an empty head, unaware of (or uncaring about) what she has caused, and incapable, apparently, of making an intelligent remark. 
Helen scarcely allows Pandarus the chance to make his arrangements with Paris and insists he sing for her, saying: 


Let thy song be love.

This love will undo us all

O Cupid, Cupid, Cupid!





óAct III, scene i, lines 111-12 


Cupid (Eros) is the god of love (see page 1-19). 
This is Helen as viewed through the eyes of courtly love. By the convention of the troubadours, a woman need not deserve love, she need merely be a woman.


Ö be thou my Charon




The arrangements with Paris are made and Pandarus hurries back to bring Troilus and Cressida together. Troilus is waiting for him in a fever of impatience, and says: 


I stalk about her door

Like a strange soul upon theStygian banks

Staying for waftage. O, be thou my Charon,

And give me swift transportance to those fields

Where I may wallow in the lily beds

Proposed for the deserver.





óAct III, scene ii, lines 7-12 


The Stygian banks are those that border the river Styx, which, according to the Greek myths, flows about Hades, separating it from the abode of mortal men. The spirits of dead men must wait upon those banks until a ferry, under the guidance of an underworld deity called Charon (see page I-68) ferried him across. 
It is not to Hades itself that Troilus demands passage, of course, but to the Elysian Fields (see page I-13) where he can "wallow in the lily beds." 


"As false as Cressid"




The lovers meet, with Pandarus licking his chops lecherously and doing everything but forcing them into embrace. The two young people make eloquent speeches to each other, protesting their love. Troilus swears his constancy, adding a new simile to the common comparisons for truth: 


"As true as Troilus" shall crown up the verse

And sanctify the numbers.





óAct III, scene ii, lines 183-84


Cressida, similarly, makes up a series of similes for falseness, adding a new and climactic one, in case she should ever be unfaithful: 


Yea, let them say, to stick the heart of falsehood,

"As false as Cressid."





óAct III, scene ii, lines 196-97 


Pandarus too chimes in: 


/ have taken such pains to bring you together,

let all pitiful goers-between be called to the world's end

after my name; call them all Pandars.





óAct III, scene ii, lines 201-3 


All these wishes came true, as Shakespeare knew they would, for they were already current in his time, thanks to Chaucer's earlier tale. And, indeed, goers-between are still called Pandars (panders) to this day. 


Let Diomedes.. .




But the young lovers have no sooner met and consummated their passion than the clouds begin to gather. In the Greek camp, remember, is Calchas, the renegade Trojan (the analogue of Chryses in the Iliad). 
His services have been such that Agamemnon has always been willing to ask the Trojans to surrender Cressida in return for some Trojan who might be prisoner of the Greeks. They have always refused. But now the Greeks have captured Antenor and he is so important to the Trojans, says Calchas, that they will surely give up Cressida to have him back. 
It is curious how this reverses the situation in the Iliad. In the Iliad Chryses the priest asks Agamemnon to return his daughter, Chryseis, who is held in the Greek camp. In Troilus and Cressida Calchas the priest asks Agamemnon to obtain his daughter, Cressida, who is held in the Trojan camp. In the Iliad Agamemnon refuses the request; in Troilus and Cressida he agrees. 
Agamemnon says: 


Let Diomedes bear him,

And bring us Cressid hither;Calchas shall have

What he requests of us.





óAct III, scene iii, lines 30-32 


Diomedes is the son of Tydeus, who was one of the seven against Thebes (see page I-57). Diomedes and the sons of the other fallen leaders swore to avenge that defeat. They were called the Epigoni ("after-born") and succeeded where their fathers had failed-taking and sacking Thebes. 
Not long after that, Diomedes and his friend Sthenelus, the son of Capaneus (see page I-58), joined the expedition to Troy, leading the men of Argos. 
In the Iliad, Diomedes is one of the most effective of the Greek warriors, third only to Achilles and Ajax. Indeed, in Book Five Diomedes wreaks havoc among the Trojans and not even Hector can stand against him. It is only in post-Homeric times that his role in the Troilus-Cressida story was invented.


Ö great Mars to faction




Diomedes is also taking the message to Hector that the Trojan's challenge has been accepted and that Ajax will fight with him. 
With that done, Ulysses now tightens his net about Achilles. He suggests that the Greek princes pass the great hero by with slight regard, while he follows behind to explain to the startled Achilles that what is past is easily forgotten and that man's reputation depends on what he is doing, not on what he has done. It is Ajax who is now the darling of the army because he is going to fight Hector, and Achilles, who is doing nothing, is disregarded. Yet Achilles, he admits, is one 


Whose glorious deeds, but in these fields of late,

Made emulous missions 'mongst the gods themselves

And drave great Mars to faction.





óAct III, scene iii, lines 187-89 


In the Iliad the gods themselves take sides in the fighting. Most active on the Greek side are Juno and Minerva (who lost out in the contest before Paris) and Neptune (who had once built walls for Troy and then been defrauded of his pay). Most active on the Trojan side are Venus (who won the contest before Paris), her loving Mars, and Apollo (who had also been defrauded in the matter of the walls, but apparently didn't care). 
At one point Mars actually joined in the spearing and killing as though he were human, until Diomedes, guided by Minerva, wounded him and drove him from the field. 
The gods do not appear in Troilus and Cressida, and their fighting leaves behind but this one reference by Ulysses. 


Ö one of Priam's daughters




Achilles says brusquely that he has his reasons for remaining out of the fight, whereupon Ulysses explains, dryly, that the reasons are not private: 


'Tis known, Achilles, that you are in love

With one of Priam's daughters.





óAct III, scene iii, lines 192-93 


The daughter in question is Polyxena. She does not appear in the Iliad, but later poets, anxious to add love and romance to Homer's austere tale, supplied her. Achilles was supposed to have fallen in love with her and to have been ready to betray the Greeks for her sake. Others write, variously, that she was indeed married to him eventually and that it was at the marriage rites that Achilles was slain by Paris (with Polyxena's treacherous help, according to some). Other versions are that she killed herself after he died, or was sacrificed at his burial rites. 


.. .Pluto'sgold




Achilles writhes in embarrassment, but Ulysses says calmly that it is not at all surprising that his secret is known: 


The providence that's in a watchful state

Knows almost every grain of Pluto's gold





óAct III, scene iii, lines 196-97 


Pluto, as the god of the underworld, was naturally related to gold and to other forms of mineral wealth found in the ground. It was an easy transition to imagine Pluto to be the god of wealth. Actually, the personification of wealth was given the name "Plutus," a close variant of "Pluto." 
In later myths Plutus was imagined to be the son of Ceres (Demeter). She is the harvest goddess and the reference to wealth in the grounds can refer to the richly growing gram as well as to the minerals. But then, Pluto (Hades) was the son-in-law of the same goddess, since it was he who carried off Proserpina, Ceres' daughter. 
To be pedantically correct, one should speak only of Plutus in connection with wealth, but the mistake is a small one. 


Ö young Pyrrhus. ..




Ulysses further turns the knife in the wound: 


But it must grieve young Pyrrhus now at home,

When fame shall in our islands sound her trump,

And all the Greekish girls shall tripping sing,

"Great Hector's sister did Achilles win,

But our great Ajax bravely beat down him."





óAct III, scene iii, lines 209-13


Pyrrhus (also known as Neoptolemus) is Achilles' son, and his birth came about as follows. 
Before the expedition to Troy began, Thetis had hidden her young son Achilles on the island of Scyrus, for she knew that if he went to Troy he would win deathless fame but die young. She preferred to have him live a quiet but long life. She had him disguised as a maiden at the court of the Scyran ruler. 
The Greeks came searching for him in response to Calchas' warning that they could not take Troy without Achilles. Ulysses cleverly discovered which maiden was Achilles by presenting a display of jewels and finery, among which a sword was hidden. Where the real girls snatched at the jewels, Achilles seized the sword. 
Apparently, Achilles also revealed himself to the other maidens in such a fashion as to father a son on one of them. That son, Pyrrhus, remained in Scyrus while Achilles was at Troy. 
The accretion of myths and elaborate tales about the central pillar of Homer's story has made hash of the chronology of the affair. 
For instance, it is at the wedding of Peleus and Thetis that the Apple of Discord is flung among the guests, and it is immediately afterward that Paris, still a herdsman, must choose among the goddesses. Paris must be a teen-ager at the time and Achilles is not yet born, so Paris must be at least fifteen years older than Achilles. 
Eventually, Paris abducts Helen and the Trojan War starts. Now Achilles is old enough to go to war. Let us say he is fifteen at the start of the war and has already left a girl with child. By the time of the last year of the war, in which both the Iliad and Troilus and Cressida are set, Achilles is twenty-four and Paris is thirty-nine. Since Hector is the oldest son of Priam, he must be in his late forties at least. 
This is bearable, perhaps, but now consider that Pyrrhus, at Achilles' death in the last year of the war, can scarcely be much more than ten years old. Yet according to the later legends, he is brought to Troy and fights with surpassing bravery in the final battles, to say nothing of being one of the crudest of the sackers at the end (see page I-209). 
Such things did not bother those who listened to the tales, of course, and they don't really bother us, either, since the value of those tales does not depend on such mundane matters as precise chronology. However, it is a curiosity and so I mention it. 


A valiant Greek Ö




Achilles is left shaken after Ulysses departs and Patroclus urges his great friend to return to the wars. (This Patroclus also does in the Iliad.) But Achilles cannot yet bring himself to do this. He suggests only that Ajax, after the combat, invite Hector and the other Trojan leaders to visit him under a flag of truce. 
Meanwhile, Diomedes has brought Antenor to Troy. He is greeted by Paris and Aeneas and Paris says:


A valiant Greek, Aeneas; take his hand.

Witness the process of your speech, wherein

You told how Diomed, a whole week by days,

Did haunt you in the field.





óAct IV, scene i, lines 7-10


This reflects a passage in the Iliad, but one that is considerably softened in Aeneas' favor. In Book Five of the Iliad, the one dominated by the feats of Diomedes, Aeneas and Diomedes meet in the field and the latter has much the better of it. With a great boulder, Diomedes strikes down Aeneas and would surely have killed him except that first Venus and then Apollo swooped down to save him. 


Ö Anchises' life




Aeneas is all chivalrous graciousness, in the best tradition of medieval gallantry, and says: 


Now, by Anchises' life,

Welcome indeed!





óAct IV, scene i, lines 21-22 


Anchises is Aeneas' father. Venus fell in love with the handsome young Anchises and had Aeneas by him. She made Anchises promise, however, that he would never reveal the fact that he was the goddess' lover. Incautiously, Anchises let out the secret and was in consequence paralyzed, blinded, or killed (depending on which version of the story you read). 
Anchises was far better known to Shakespeare's audience than one might expect from the Greek myths alone. He is the subject of a dramatic story in Vergil's Aeneid. The aged Anchises cannot walk (this fits in with the suggestion that he was paralyzed because of his indiscretion concerning Venus) and was therefore helpless at the time of the sack and destruction of Troy. Aeneas, therefore, bore him out of the burning city on his back, thus setting a greatly admired example of filial love, a love that is reflected backward by having Aeneas swear by his father's life. 


By Venus' hand Ö




Aeneas goes on to combine hospitality and martial threat in courtly manner: 


By Venus' hand 1 swear,

No man alive can love in such a sort

The thing he means to kill

more excellently.





óAct IV, scene i, lines 22-24 


The mention of Venus' hand makes sense in light of the events in Book Five of the Iliad. When Aeneas lies felled by Diomedes' boulder, sure to be killed if the gods did not intervene, Venus (Aeneas' mother) flew down from Olympus to save him. The furious Diomedes cast his spear even at the goddess and wounded her in the hand. She fled, screaming, and it was only when the much more powerful Apollo took her place that Diomedes was forced to retire. Thus, Aeneas was swearing by that part of his mother which had been hurt on his behalf. 
Ö Some say the Genius 
On the very morning after their night together, the news comes to Troilus that he must give up Cressida and send her to the Greek camp. 
Brokenhearted, Troilus and Cressida vow eternal fidelity. Troilus gives Cressida a sleeve (an arm cover which in medieval times was a separate article of clothing, not sewn to shirt or robe) and Cressida returns a glove. 
The deputation waits outside for Cressida to be turned over to them, and when Aeneas calls out impatiently, Troilus says: 


Hark! You are called.Some say the Genius

Cries so to him that instantly must die.





óAct IV, scene iv, lines 50-51 


To the Romans, every man had a personal spirit (the equivalent of what we would call a guardian angel) which they called a "Genius." Every woman, similarly, had her "Juno," and Genius may be a masculine form of Juno. To this day, we speak of a man who is supremely gifted as a "genius," though we forget that by this we mean that the divine spirit is speaking through him with particular effectiveness. 
Hosts of superstitions naturally arose concerning these Geniuses. It would warn the person it guarded of imminent death, for instance, as Troilus says here. 


Fie, fie upon her




Cressida is brought to the Greek camp, where she is suddenly a different person. She has been flirtatious and a little hypocritical with Troilus, teasing and a little ribald with Pandarus, but nothing so bad. In the Greek camp, however, she is suddenly a gay wanton, joking with the Greek leaders and eager to kiss them all-even Nestor. 
Only the clear-eyed Ulysses refuses, insulting her openly, and saying to Nestor after she leaves: 


Fie, fie upon her!

There's language in her eye, her cheek, her lip;

Nay, her foot speaks. Her wanton spirits look out

At every joint and motive of her body.





óAct IV, scene v, lines 54-57 


Without warning, Cressida is pictured as an utterly worthless woman. 
Why so sudden a change? Surely there must have been room to express Cressida's side of the matter in at least one speech. She is torn away from home, and from love at the very moment of that love's height, with only her father at her side, frightened, uncertain, weak. Chaucer, in his version, presents Cressida's dilemma far more sympathetically and lets us pity her in her fall. Shakespeare only lets us despise her. 
Might we speculate that Shakespeare is being savage to Cressida and showing her in the worst possible fashion because he wishes to make a point outside the play? 
The play seems to have been performed first in 1602, and Shakespeare may have been writing it in 1600-1. Is there a possibility, then, that Shakespeare was influenced by a dramatic event that took place in the time when he was writing the play? 
Shakespeare's patron, Henry Wriothesley, Earl of Southampton (see page I-3), with whom Shakespeare may have been on the closest possible terms, was himself a member of the faction of Robert Devereux, 2nd Earl of Essex. 
About the time that Shakespeare was beginning his career as a dramatist, Essex had become the favorite and lover of Queen Elizabeth I (who was thirty-three years older than he was). 
Essex longed for a successful military career, though the sensible Queen saw that although he might be suitable for a lover, he was not suitable for a general. In 1596, however, he finally persuaded her to allow him to lead an expedition to Spain (with which England was still carrying on a desultory war, a war of which the defeat of the Armada in 1588 had been the high point). Southampton accompanied him on this expedition. 
The expedition had a certain success, for the city of Cadiz was seized and sacked. Elizabeth I did not consider the results of the expedition to have been worth its expense, however-she was always a most careful lady with a shilling-and Essex did not receive the credit that he (and his faction, including Southampton and, presumably, Shakespeare) felt he deserved. 
Essex, however, became more of a war hawk than ever, having tasted the delights of victory. In 1599 he talked the reluctant Elizabeth (who by now was beginning to feel he was becoming entirely too ambitious to be a safe subject) into letting him lead an expedition into Ireland to put down a rebellion there. Again Southampton left with him, but this time Elizabeth called him back, to his deep discomfiture. 
The Essex faction had high hopes for the Irish adventure, and Shakespeare, writing Henry V while Essex was in Ireland, refers to the expedition most flatteringly in the chorus that precedes Act V of that play (see page II-508). 
The expedition, however, proved a complete fiasco and Essex returned to England in absolute fury at what he, and his faction, believed to be the machinations of the anti-Essex group at the English court. It seemed to them that they had deliberately intrigued against Essex to prevent him from achieving military renown. 
In desperation, Essex began to plot rebellion. Southampton arranged to have Shakespeare's play Richard 11 revived. It dealt with the deposition of an English monarch (see page II-304) and Elizabeth did not miss the point. Both Southampton and Essex were arrested, tried for treason, and convicted in February 1601. Essex was, indeed, executed on February 25, but Southampton's sentence was commuted to life imprisonment and, after Elizabeth's death in 1603, he was released. 
It is tempting to think that Shakespeare wrote Troilus and Cressida under the deep shadow of the misfortunes of Essex and Southampton. 
To him, the expedition against Troy may have seemed very much like Essex's expeditions against Cadiz and, later, against Ireland. These expeditions were fought for what seemed to Shakespeare, perhaps, to be a most ungrateful and worthless woman who was oblivious to the sufferings of her faithful servants and whom he may have envisioned as amusing herself with Essex's rival, Sir Walter Raleigh, while the faithful Essex was suffering in the field. Could this be why Shakespeare draws Helen as so contemptible (see page I-111)? 
The factions that disrupted the Greek effort on the fields of Troy were magnified by Shakespeare, perhaps as a bitter satire on the factions at the English court that had, in the view of the Essex faction, stabbed Essex in the back. 
And Cressida, of course, would then be another aspect of Elizabeth- that false woman who had betrayed her lover and sent him to the gallows. Could Shakespeare have been working on the fourth act just when the execution of Essex came to pass (with Southampton still in prison)? Could he have turned to his pen for revenge on Cressida, making no effort whatever to explain her or excuse her? Did he want her defection to be as bare and as disgraceful as possible so that Ulysses' "Fie, fie upon her!" might reflect as strongly as possible upon the Queen? 


The youngest sonÖ




At last we are ready for the duel between Hector and Ajax. Since Ajax is a relative of Hector's (here again is the confusion between Ajax and Teucer) it is agreed that the fight is not to be to the death. 
While they prepare, Agamemnon asks the name of a sad Trojan on the other side. Ulysses answers: 


The youngest son of Priam, a true knight,

Not yet mature, yet matchless Ö





óAct IV, scene v, lines 96-97 


It is Troilus being described here, in the very highest terms. The praise has nothing directly to do with the play, and one cannot help but wonder if Shakespeare intends it to refer to the betrayed and executed Essex; if it is his epitaph for that rash person. 
This is an example, by the way, of the curious way in which in Troilus and Cressida the combatants on either side don't seem to know each other until they are introduced, although they have presumably been fighting each other for years. 
This is true in the Iliad as well. In Book Three of that poem, when Paris and Menelaus are getting ready for their duel, Priam and his councilors sit on the wall and view the Greek army. Helen is there too, and Priam has her identify several of the Greek champions: Agamemnon, Ulysses, Ajax. Surely after nine years of war Priam ought to know these people. Perhaps the war was much shorter in the earliest legends (and, for all we know, in truth) but grew longer to accommodate the numerous tales added to the primitive story by later poets-and perhaps Homer's tale was tailored to correspond, unavoidably leaving inconsistencies as a result. 


Not Neoptolemus Ö




The duel between Ajax and Hector is fought and ends in a draw and in a graceful speech by the chivalrous Hector, as does the similar duel in Book Seven of the Iliad (where, however, Hector clearly gets the worse of the exchanges). 
Ajax, who is not very good at speaking, manages to express his disappointment at not having beaten Hector definitely. 
To which Hector, rather vaingloriously, replies:


Not Neoptolemus so mirable,

On whose bright crest Fame with her loud'st "Oyes"

Cries, "This is he!" could promise to himself

A thought of added honor torn from Hector.





óAct IV, scene v, lines 141-44 


The only Neoptolemus in the Greek myths was the son of Achilles (see page I-116), who was also known as Pyrrhus, meaning "ruddy," the latter possibly being a nickname. This is possibly an anachronism on Shakespeare's part, for Hector could scarcely be speaking of a boy who had not yet appeared in the war-or else it is Achilles who is being referred to rather than his son. 


/ knew thy grandsire.. .




The Trojan leaders are then invited to the Greek camp under conditions of truce (as Achilles had asked, see page I-116). There they greet each other with careful courtesy, and old Nestor says to Hector: 


I knew thy grandsire,

And once fought with him.





óAct IV, scene v, lines 195-96 


Hector's grandfather was Laomedon, who built the walls of Troy. According to legend, he built them with the aid of Poseidon and Apollo, who were condemned to earthly labor by Zeus for their rebellion against him (which Thetis and Briareus thwarted, see page I-86). When the walls were complete, Laomedon refused the gods their pay and in revenge they sent a sea monster to ravage the Trojan coast. 
The Trojans had to sacrifice maidens periodically to the monster, and eventually Laomedon's own daughter, Hesione, was exposed to him. She was rescued by Hercules. It was when Laomedon broke his word again and refused certain horses which he had promised in return for the rescue, that Hercules sacked the city and took Hesione captive. He also killed Laomedon and all but one of his sons. The sole surviving son was Priam. 
Nestor is not recorded as having fought with Laomedon (either for him or against him, in either meaning of the phrase). There is, however, an odd coincidence here. Hercules is also recorded as having made war against Neleus, Nestor's father, to have slain Neleus and all but one of his sons and to have placed the one survivor, Nestor, on the throne of Pylos. In this respect, Priam and Nestor had a good deal in common.


Ö your Greekish embassy




Hector also greets Ulysses (who has cleverly cut off what promises to be a flood of Nestorian reminiscence) and says: 


Ah, sir, there's many a Greek and Troyan dead,

Since first I saw yourself and Diomed

In llion, on your Greekish embassy.





óAct IV, scene v, lines 213-15 


This represents a point of difference from the Iliad. Before the fighting began, the Greeks had sent Ulysses and Menelaus (not Diomedes) to Troy, under a flag of truce, to demand the return of Helen. This is referred to in Book Three of the Iliad. 
It is, however, very easy to associate Diomedes with Ulysses, for they often acted in concert in the legends about Troy. In the Iliad it is Ulysses and Diomedes who act in concert in Book Ten to kill Rhesus the Thracian. 
In later myths they are also joined. Thus, the two together sneak into Troy itself in order to steal the Palladium, an image of Minerva (Athena), who bore the alternate name of Pallas, after which the object, holy to her, was named. This was supposed to guard the city and it was not until it was stolen that the city became vulnerable. 


Tomorrow do I meet thee Ö




As the fourth act ends, it would seem that a well-rounded climax is clearly being prepared. Troilus approaches Ulysses to ask where Calchas' tent might be located. Ulysses has shown that he admires Troilus and despises Cressida, and it is no great feat to guess that he will be the instrument whereby Troilus will learn of Cressida's infidelity. 
As for Achilles, Ulysses' plan has worked wonderfully. He is a new man and when Hector twits him for not fighting, he says: 


Dost thou entreat me, Hector?

Tomorrow do I meet thee, jell as death;





óAct IV, scene v, lines 267-68 


What, then, ought we to expect in the fifth act? Troilus will learn of Cressida's faithlessness, we can be sure, and will go raving out on the field to avenge himself on the Greeks. Perhaps he is to be killed by Diomedes, perhaps by Achilles-but he must die. Troilus dies, in the Greek legends that deal with him, before Achilles' spear, and of what dramatic value is it to survive under the conditions of the tragedy as outlined in this play?
Achilles must also kill Hector, since that is an absolute necessity; all versions of the Troy legend agree there. In the Iliad Achilles returns to the fight only after Hector has killed Patroclus, but perhaps Shakespeare might not have needed that part of Homer's plot. After all, Shakespeare's presentation of Patroclus scarcely fits the notion of that effeminate as a doughty warrior. (Homer's presentation of Patroclus was quite different.) Shakespeare might well have felt it would be more satisfactory to have Ulysses' plan stand as the spring that set Achilles to fighting again. 
Then, Cressida must die too. Perhaps by her own hand out of contrition or perhaps, in shame, after being cast off by a disgusted, or sated, or callous Diomedes. 
Indeed, a century before Troilus and Cressida was written, a Scottish poet named Robert Henryson had written a continuation of Chaucer's tale and called it Testament of Cresseid. It was so close an imitation of Chaucer that for a while it was considered authentically Chaucerian and in 1532 was actually included in an edition of Chaucer's works. 
In the Testament Diomedes grows tired of Cressida and casts her off. Cressida rails against Venus and Cupid and is stricken by them with leprosy in punishment. Her face and body utterly altered by this loathsome disease, she begs by the roadside, and Troilus, magnificent on his horse, passes her and tosses her a coin, without recognizing her. 
It is a crude denouement, and a savage one, and we could hope that the gentle Shakespeare might never have felt tempted to adopt it, but it was popular and shows what an audience would like in the way of dramatic retribution. 
What does Shakespeare really do, then? 
Very little, really. The fifth act falls apart and Troilus and Cressida, which is tight enough and sensible enough through the first four acts, becomes a rather unsatisfactory play as a result of the fifth act. While it is not my intention in this book to make literary judgments, it appears that the fifth act is so poor that some critics have suggested that Shakespeare did not write it. 
We can imagine such a possibility. Suppose that Essex's execution had taken place while Shakespeare was writing Troilus and Cressida. He might have written the fourth act savagely, putting Cressida in her place, and then have found the whole thing too unpleasant to continue. If he abandoned the play, some other member of the actors' company of which Shakespeare was a member may have worked up an ending for the play; one that could not match what had gone before, naturally. 
Or perhaps we don't have to go that far. It is not absolutely essential to absolve Shakespeare of every inferior passage in his plays. He may have been the greatest writer who ever lived but he was still a man and not a god. He could still write hurriedly; he could still write halfheartedly. And with Essex's execution burning him, he may have botched the last act himself. 


.. a letter from Queen Hecuba




Just as the fifth act begins there is a sudden retreat from the situation as it had been developed at the end of the fourth act. Suddenly Thersites delivers a letter to Achilles, who reads it and says: 


My sweet Patroclus, I am thwarted quite

From my great purpose in tomorrow's battle.

Here is a letter from Queen Hecuba,

A token from her daughter, my fair love,

Both taxing me and gaging me to keep

An oath that I have sworn. 1 will not break it.





óAct V, scene i, lines 38-43 


So all of Ulysses' careful planning, all his wisdom and slyness, go suddenly for nothing, and when Achilles is brought to battle it will be in Homer's fashion. In that case, why should Shakespeare have introduced Ulysses' plot at all? It is almost as though another hand, taking up the fifth act, having no idea as to what Shakespeare intended, fell back on Homer in default of anything else. 


Ö Ariachne's broken woofÖ




Meanwhile Ulysses has guided Troilus to Calchas' tent, where the young man quickly sees that Cressida is false. The conversation is one long, shallow flirtation of Cressida with Diomedes. She even gives him as a token the very sleeve that Troilus had given her. 
The brokenhearted Troilus tries to chop logic and convince himself that he does not really see his Cressida; that there are two Cressidas. One is Diomedes' Cressida, a faithless, worthless woman; and the other, secure in his own mind, is his ideal Cressida, faithful and true. Yet he must admit that this separation is not real, that somehow the two are one: 


And yet the spacious breadth of this division

Admits no orifex for a point as subtle

As Ariachne's broken woof to enter.





óAct V, scene ii, lines 147-49 


Arachne (not "Ariachne," a change Shakespeare makes to save the meter, apparently) was a Lydian woman so proud of her skill as a weaver that she challenged Minerva (Athena) herself to compete with her. In the competition, Arachne produced a tapestry into which those myths that were uncomplimentary to the gods were woven. When she was done, Minerva could find no fault with it and petulantly tore it to shreds. Arachne tried to hang herself, but Minerva, somewhat remorsefully, saved her life, changed the girl into a spider and the rope into a strand of spider web. 
Troilus is saying that not even the finest strand of a spider's web can really be fit between the two Cressidas he is trying to conjure up. He realizes that there is only one Cressida and that he has been betrayed. 


Ö The fierce Polydamas




And now suddenly the play explodes into a battle scene, something which the Iliad is fiercely crammed with. It begins with Hector arming himself for the fray despite the pleas of his wife Andromache, his sister Cassandra, and his father Priam. Troilus, on the other hand, urges him into the battle with savage forcefulness, for he longs for revenge on Diomedes. 
The tide of battle goes against the Greeks to begin with and Agamemnon comes on stage to rally his men: 


Renew, renew! The fierce Polydamas

Hath beat down Menon;





óAct V, scene v, lines 6-7 


Polydamas appears briefly in the Iliad as a friend of Hector's, one who counsels moderation. In Book Twelve, when the Trojan fortunes are beginning to ride high, Polydamas cautions against cocksureness and predicts the end may be disaster. Trojans are winning victories because Achilles is not fighting, but what if he rejoins the battle? 
It is to him that Hector makes a famous rejoinder. In quite an un-Homeric mood, he derides all the omens, all the worries about whether birds are flying on the right or on the left, and says: "A divine message? The best divine message is: 'Defend your country!'." 


Ö Palamedes




Menon, whom Polydamas has "beat down," does not appear in the Iliad, nor do most of the other names that Agamemnon calls out, recounting the tale of defeats in sonorous syllables.
One name, however, perhaps by accident, is memorable, though he does not appear in the Iliad. Agamemnon speaks of: 


Ö Palamedes Sore hurt and bruised.





óAct V, scene v, lines 13-14 


Palamedes appears in the later myths as a man almost as shrewd as Ulysses himself. When the heroes were gathering to go to Troy, Menelaus and Palamedes traveled to Ithaca to urge Ulysses to come. Ulysses had learned from an oracle that if he went he would not return for twenty years and then penniless and alone, so he pretended to be mad. He guided a plow along the seashore, sowing salt instead of seed. Palamedes watched the display cynically, and suddenly placed Ulysses' one-year-old son, Telemachus, in the path of the plow. Ulysses turned it aside and his pretense of madness was broken. 
Ulysses never forgave Palamedes and eventually engineered his death by having him framed for treason. This happened before the Iliad opens and there is no hint concerning it in Homer's tale. 
This speech of Agamemnon's reflects the situation in Book Fifteen of the Iliad. Achilles obdurately refuses to fight; a number of the Greek chieftains, including Agamemnon, Diomedes, and Ulysses, have been wounded, and the Trojan fortunes are at their peak. The Greeks have fallen back to their very ships and the Trojans, with Hector leading them on, are bringing the torches with which to set those ships on fire. 


Patroclus ta'en Ö




But in the course of Agamemnon's cry, however, one significant phrase creeps in: 


Patroclus ta'en or slain.





óAct V, scene v, line 13 


Thus, in four words, is masked the most dramatic portion of the Iliad. Achilles, having brutally rejected Agamemnon's offer of amends in Book Nine, forfeits the side of right and must, in his turn, begin to pay. 
That payment comes in Book Sixteen, when Patroclus, horror-stricken at the Greek defeat and at the imminent burning of their ships, begs Achilles to let him enter the fight. Achilles agrees. He allows Patroclus to wear Achilles' own armor, but warns him merely to drive the Trojans from the ships and not to attempt to assault the city. 
Patroclus does well. The Trojans are driven back, but the excitement of battle causes him to forget Achilles' advice. He pursues the fleeing Trojans, is stopped by Hector, and killed. 


Ö bear Patroclus' bodyÖ




Agamemnon's remark that Patroclus is either taken or slain is soon settled in favor of the latter alternative. Nestor enters, saying: 


Go, bear Patroclus' body to Achilles,





óAct V, scene v, line 17 


Again, in a few words, many dramatic deeds in the Iliad are slurred over. In Book Seventeen there is a gigantic struggle over Patroclus' body. Hector manages to strip the dead man of the armor of Achilles, but the Greeks save the body itself in a fight in which Menelaus and Ajax do particularly well. In the Iliad it is Menelaus who sends the message to Achilles, not Nestor, but then it is Nestor's son, Antilochus (who does not appear in Troilus and Cressida), who actually carries the message. 
Ö Great Achilles Events follow quickly. Ulysses comes onstage, crying: 


O courage, courage, princes! Great Achilles

Is arming, weeping, cursing, vowing vengeance!

Patroclus' wounds have roused his drowsy blood,





óAct V, scene v, lines 30-32 


So it happens in the Iliad. Achilles, paid back for his intransigence, realizes too late that he has sulked in his tent too long. In the Iliad, however, he doesn't arm so quickly. He has no armor, for he had given it to Patroclus, who had lost it to Hector. 
A new set of armor must be forged for Achilles by Vulcan himself, something to which Book Eighteen of the Iliad is devoted. In Book Nineteen there is the formal reconciliation of Agamemnon and Achilles, and only then, in Book Twenty, does Achilles join the battle. 


.. . I'll hunt thee for thy hide




In Books Twenty, Twenty-one, and Twenty-two, Achilles is at war, and none can stand before him. Indeed, in those three books, no Greek warrior but Achilles is mentioned. It is as though he, a single man, fights alone against the Trojans (with occasional help from one god or another) and defeats them. 
In Book Twenty-two, when the Trojan army has fled within the walls of Troy in fear of the raging Achilles, Hector at last comes out alone to meet him in the climactic battle of the Iliad. But the issue is never hi doubt. 
The onrush of Achilles daunts even Hector, and at the last moment he turns to flee, trying to find his way safe through one of the city gates. Achilles heads him off and three times they run completely round the city (which can only be village-size by modern standards). 
Only then does Hector turn, perforce, to face Achilles, and is killed! 
None of this can appear in Troilus and Cressida. The medieval poets, with their pro-Trojan/Roman prejudice, had to treat Hector much more gently, and Shakespeare inherits that attitude from them. 
He has the two champions fight indeed, but it is Achilles who has to fall back, weakening. Hector says, gallantly, 


Pause, if thou wilt.





óAct V, scene vi, line 14 


And Achilles goes off, muttering that he is out of practice. 
Yet something must be done to account for the fact that Hector does indeed die at the hands of Achilles, so Shakespeare makes the former do a most un-Hectorish thing. Hector meets an unnamed Greek in rich armor and decides he wants it. When the Greek tries to run, Hector calls out: 


Wilt thou not, beast, abide?

Why then, fly on, I'll hunt thee for thy hide.





óAct V, scene vi, lines 30-31 


Nowhere in Homer, nor anywhere else in this play, does Hector give anyone reason to think he would ever call a foeman "beast" or take the attitude that war is a hunt, with other men playing the role of animals, and it is partly because of this that some critics doubt that Shakespeare wrote the last act. And yet it is necessary for Hector to do something of this sort, in order that he might earn the retribution that now falls upon him. 


Ö Troy, sink down




Hector catches his prey and kills him. It is late in the day and Hector decides the day's fight is over. Perhaps he is helped to that decision by his eagerness to try on the new armor he has won. At any rate, he takes off his own armor, stands unprotected-and at that moment, Achilles and a contingent of his Myrmidons appear on the scene. 
Hector cries out that he is unarmed, but Achilles orders his men to kill, and then says, in grim satisfaction: 


So, Ilion, fall thou next! Come, Troy, sink down!

Here lies thy heart, thy sinews, and thy bone.





óAct V, scene viii, lines 11-12 


For Achilles to kill Hector in this way is unthinkable in a Homeric context and must strike any lover of the Iliad as simple sacrilege. But there it is-the medieval pro-Trojan, pro-Hector view. 


Ö wells and Niobes. ..




Troilus bears the news of Hector's death to the Trojan army: 


Go in to Troy, and say there Hector's dead.

There is a word will Priam turn to stone,

Make wells and Niobes of the maids and wives,





óAct V, scene x, lines 17-19 


Niobe was a Theban queen, a daughter of Tantalus (see page I-13), whose pride in her six sons and six daughters led her to boast herself the superior of the goddess Latona (Leto), who had only one of each. La-tona's children, however, happened to be Apollo and Diana. 
To avenge the taunt, Apollo and Diana shot down all twelve children, the twelfth in Niobe's arms. She wept continuously after that, day after day, until the gods, in pity, turned her to stone, with a spring of tears still bubbling out and trickling down. 


Ö no more to say




This essentially ends the play. As Troilus says: 


Hector is dead; there is no more to say.





óAct V, scene x, line 22 


To be sure, Troilus promises revenge on the Greeks and on Achilles particularly, but that is just talk. There can be no revenge. Troy must fall.
Nor has Troilus revenge on Diomedes or Cressida. Diomedes still lives and still has Cressida. 
The fifth act is an ending of sorts, but it is not the ending toward which the first four acts were heading. 








5. The Life of Timon Of Athens


Shakespeare wrote a narrative poem and three plays set in the legendary days of Greek history. He wrote only one play that was based- in a very tenuous way-in the days of Greece's greatest glory, the fifth century b.c. 
This century was the Golden Age of Athens, when she beat off giant Persia and built a naval empire, when she had great leaders like Themis-tocles, Aristides, and Pericles; great dramatists like Aeschylus, Sophocles, Euripides, and Aristophanes; great sculptors like Phidias; great scientists like Anaxagoras; great philosophers like Socrates and Plato. 
But Shakespeare chose to mark the time by writing a play, Timon of Athens, that is generally considered one of his least satisfactory. Many critics consider it to be an unfinished play, one that Shakespeare returned to on and off, never patching it to his liking, and eventually abandoning it. 


Ö the Lord Timon.. .




The play opens in the house of a rich man. A Poet, a Painter, a Jeweler, and a Merchant all enter. They are given no names but are identified only by their professions. The Jeweler has a jewel and the Merchant says: 


O pray let's see't. For the Lord Timon, sir?





óAct I, scene i, line 13 


The Lord Timon is the owner of the house; the center toward which all these and others are tending. 
Timon is, apparently, a historical character who lived in Athens during the Peloponnesian War (431-404 b.c.-eight centuries after the Trojan War), so that we may set the opening of the play in the last quarter of the fifth century b.c. 
Timon's fame to his contemporaries and near successors, such as Aristophanes and Plato, lay entirely in the fact that he was a misanthrope. In fact, he was referred to as "Timon Misanthropes" ("Timon the ManHater"). He lived by himself, professed to hate mankind and to detest human society. To the sociable Greeks, to whom conversation and social intercourse were the breath of life, there was something monstrous in this. Plutarch, in his "Life of Mark Antony," describes how, at a low point in his career, Antony decided for a while to imitate Timon and withdraw from human society. Shakespeare may have come across this while working on his play Antony and Cleopatra (see page I-370) and conceived the idea of writing a play centered on the condition of misanthropy. And, indeed, Timon of Athens seems to have been written immediately after Antony and Cleopatra, in 1606 or 1607. 


The senators of Athens Ö






Additional men enter and the Poet identifies them, saying: 


The senators of Athens, happy men!




óAct I, scene i, line 40 


Throughout the play Shakespeare treats Athens, with whose social and political life he is unacquainted, as though it were Rome, a city with which he was much more at home. Athens had no senators or anything quite equivalent to the well-known legislators of Rome. Yet Shakespeare, throughout the play, has the rulers of Athens act like the stern, irascible, grasping Roman aristocrats, rather than like the gay, impulsive, weathercock democrats they really were. 
Indeed, so anxious does Shakespeare appear to be to deal with Rome rather than with Athens, that almost every character in the play has a Roman name. This is quite out of the question in reality, of course. No Roman name was ever heard of in Athens of Timon's time. Rome itself had never been heard of. If Rome had forced itself on the attention of any Athenian of the time, it would have seemed only a barbarian Italian village of utterly no account. 


Feigned Fortune.. .




But Timon is not yet Misanthropes. He is, at the beginning of the play, an extremely wealthy man of almost unbelievable benevolence. He seeks for excuses to give money away and every man there is trying to get his share. 
Yet the Poet, at least, is not entirely fooled by the superficial appearance of wealth and happiness that surrounds Timon. He speaks of his poetry to the Painter, and describes its content by saying: 


Sir, I have upon a high and pleasant hill

Feigned Fortune to be throned.




óAct I, scene i, lines 63-64 


The goddess of fortune (Fortuna to the Romans and Tyche to the Greeks) became popular in the period that followed Greece's Golden Age. Alexander the Great had come and gone like lightning across the skies, bringing Greece vast conquests and vast derangements. The individual Greek cities came to be helpless in the grip of generals and armies; culture decayed as materialism grew and the rich grew richer while the poor grew poorer. 
Fortune was a deity of chance and was just right for the age following Alexander the Great; an age which saw the passing of youth and confidence, and in which good and evil seemed to be handed out at random and without any consideration of desert. 
The Poet explains that Fortune beckons benignly and Timon mounts the hill, carrying with him all those he befriends. But Fortune is fickle and Timon may be kicked down the hill by her. In that case, none of the friends he took up the hill with him will follow him down. 
Shakespeare is, in this way, preparing the audience for the consideration of what it was that made Timon a misanthrope. 
Plutarch says only that "Ö for the unthankfulness of those he had done good unto and whom he took to be his friends, he was angry with all men and would trust no man." 
Another similar treatment of Timon at much greater length was by a Greek writer, Lucian, born in Syria about a.d. 120. He had written twenty-six Dialogues of the Gods, in which he poked satirical fun at conventional religion, but so pleasantly that even the pious must have found it difficult to take offense. 
His best essay is considered to be "Timon," in which he uses the theme of a man who has become misanthropic through the ingratitude of others to poke fun at Jupiter and at Wealth. He expands on the hint in Plutarch and makes Timon out to have been, originally, a fantastically generous man who beggared himself for his friends and then found none who would help him. 
Shakespeare adopted this notion, but removed all the fun and humor in Lucian's dialogue and replaced it with savagery. 


Ö a dog




Timon himself now enters, and moves among all those present with affability and generosity, giving to all who ask, denying no one. He accepts their rather sickening sycophancy with good humor, but accepts it.
There is only one sour note and that is when the philosopher Apemantus enters. He is churlish and his every speech is a curt insult The Painter strikes back with: 


Y'are a dog.




óAct I, scene i, line 202 


This is not a mere insult, but, in a way, a statement of fact, if a slightly anachronistic one. 
About 400 b.c. a philosopher named Antisthenes taught that virtue was more important than riches or comfort and that, indeed, poverty was welcome, for wealth and luxury were corrupting. One of his pupils was Diogenes, who lived near Corinth about 350 b.c. and who carried Antisthenes' teachings to an extreme. 
Diogenes lived in the greatest possible destitution to show that people needed no belongings to be virtuous. He loudly derided all the polite social customs of the day, denouncing them as hypocrisy. 
Diogenes and those who followed him made ordinary men uncomfortable. These grating philosophers seemed to bark and snarl at all that made life pleasant. They were called kynikos ("doglike") because of their snarling, and this became "cynic" in English. 
Diogenes accepted the name and became "Diogenes the Cynic." Apemantus is pictured in this play as a Cynic a century before the term became fashionable, and when the Painter calls him a dog, he is really dismissing him as a Cynic. 
Apemantus' insults extend even to Timon. When the Poet tries to defend Timon, Apemantus considers it mere flattery and says, crushingly: 


He that loves to be flattered

is worthy o'th'flatterer.





óAct I, scene i, lines 229-30 


This is the first clear statement that Timon, despite appearances, is not entirely to be admired. He is extremely generous, but is it in order to do good, or in order to be flattered and fawned upon? There is something so public, ostentatious, and indiscriminate in his benevolences that they grow suspect. 


'Tis AlcibiadesÖ




A messenger comes in with the announcement of new visitors; 


Tis Alcibiades and some twenty horse,





óAct I, scene i, line 246 


Alcibiades is the only character in the play who has an important role in Athenian history. He was an Athenian general of noble birth, handsome and brilliant, who in the end turned traitor and did Athens infinite harm. 
He is brought into the play because Plutarch uses him as an occasion for an example of Timon's misanthropy. The one man Timon made much of was Alcibiades, and when asked why that was, Timon answered, harshly, "I do it because I know that one day he shall do great mischief unto the Athenians." 
This is rather better and more specific insight than individuals are likely to have, and in all probability the story is apocryphal and was invented long after Alcibiades had demonstrated the harm he did Athens. 


Ö Plutus, the god of gold




Timon is giving a feast that night as he is wont to do. In fact, one Lord who means to partake of it says of him: 


He pours it out. Plutus,

the god of gold, Is but his steward Ö





óAct I, scene i, lines 283-84 


Plutus is related, by name and origin, to Pluto, the king of the underworld, and represents the wealth of the soil, both mineral and vegetable (see page I-115). 
The later Greeks considered Plutus to be a son of Fortune, who had been blinded by Jupiter so that he gives his gifts indiscriminately. In Lu-cian's dialogue, Wealth is also pictured as blind and as giving his gifts to anyone he happens to bump into. Thus, once again, Timon's wealth is associated with chance and its slippery nature made plain. 
What's more, Timon will give, but won't receive. He says as much to Ventidius, one of his guests at the feast. Ventidius tries to thank him for favors received, but Timon says: 


You mistake my love;

I gave it freely ever, and there's none

Can truly say he gives, if he receives.





óAct I, scene ii, lines 9-11 


In this respect, though, Timon seems to aspire to be a god, since surely only a god can always give, never receive. Furthermore, Timon would deprive others of the act of giving, which he apparently considers the supreme pleasure. Would he reserve the supreme pleasure exclusively for himself? 
It is almost as though Timon were divorcing himself from mankind through the unique act of giving without receiving. He will not condescend to be human and in that respect he (so to speak) hates mankind. Perhaps Shakespeare meant to show (if he could have polished the play into final form) that a man does not become a misanthrope unless he has been one all along. Perhaps he meant to show that Timon did not pass from benevolence to misanthropy but merely changed from one form of misanthropy to another. 


A thousand talents. ..




The banquet ends in a general donation to everyone by Timon, so that cynical Apemantus guesses that Timon will be going bankrupt soon. The guess is correct and even conservative, for though Timon doesn't know it (scorning, like a god, to inquire into the status of his wealth) he is already deep in debt. 
His creditors (whom his steward has long been holding off) will be restrained no longer, and not long after the banquet Timon is told the situation. All astonished, he finds out that all his land is sold, all his cash is spent, all his assets gone. Yet he will not accept the reproaches of his steward but is cheerfully confident he can borrow from his many adoring friends. 
He sends his servants to various people who are in debt to him for past favors and tells them to ask, casually, for large sums. The steward, Flavius, he sends to the senators so that the city treasury may reward him for money he had in the past given it. He tells Flavius: 


Bid 'em send o'th'instant

A thousand talents to me.





óAct II, scene ii, lines 208-9 


A talent was a huge sum of money. It is equal to nearly sixty pounds of silver, and by modern standards it is equivalent to about two thousand dollars. What Timon was so cavalierly asking for "o'th'instant" was two million dollars. The city of Athens could not possibly have made available that sum of money to a private person "o'th'instant." 
The ridiculous size of the sum requested is sometimes taken as an indication that Shakespeare did not know how much a talent was worth, and either hadn't done the necessary research by the time he abandoned the play, or, if he had, never got around to changing the figures throughout. 
What is even more likely to be a mistake appears a little later, as scene after scene passes in which Timon's servants vainly try to borrow money from those whom earlier the once rich man had so loaded with benefits. Thus, Lucius, one of those so benefited, says, incredulously, to one of the pleading servants: 


/ know his lordship is but merry with me.

He cannot want fifty five hundred talents.





óAct III, scene ii, lines 40-41 


He cannot indeed. That would be some 160 tons of silver. A private person of Timon's time simply could not have had so much wealth to hand out on the moment. Perhaps Shakespeare was dithering between fifty talents and five hundred talents, wondering if the latter was too great, and, having written in both, never got around to erasing one or the other by the time he had abandoned the play. 
It is tempting to despise those whom Timon had so benefited and who were now so lost to gratitude. But let us be reasonable. Timon had forced the benefits on his friends, eager to demonstrate godlike generosity. Should those friends now deliver their money to someone who had displayed such abysmal lack of understanding of personal finance? Whatever they gave him would surely be lost forever and at once. 
Naturally, Timon did not look at it that way at all. His pretensions to superhuman wealth and benevolence had been punctured and he found himself in a towering rage of frustration and humiliation as a result. 


At LacedaemonÖ




Meanwhile, Alcibiades is having an argument of his own with the Athenian Senate. Some soldier is under sentence of death for murder and Alcibiades is pleading for a reversal of the sentence on the grounds that death came as a result of an honorable duel fought in anger that had come about because the man under sentence had been bitterly offended. 
Who the soldier is, what the occasion, why the Senate is so harsh or Alcibiades so insistent are not explained. Shakespeare had inserted the scene, perhaps the best in the play, but had never gotten around to supplying the mortar that would connect it properly to what had gone before. It seems clear, though, that Shakespeare is setting up a subplot to show another facet of the "ingratitude" theme. Alcibiades says of the soldier: 


His service done

At Lacedaemon and Byzantium

Were a sufficient briber for his life.





óAct III, scene v, lines 60-62 


This vaguely suits the Peloponnesian War, which was going on in the lifetime of Timon and Alcibiades. Athens was fighting a coalition led by the city of Sparta, of which an alternate (and, in some respects, more nearly official) name was Lacedaemon. 
However, the speech makes it sound as though there was fighting at Lacedaemon, and that wasn't so. The city of Sparta, protected by its unparalleled army, was unapproachable throughout the sixth and fifth centuries b.c. It was not until Sparta suffered a shattering defeat at the hands of Thebes, thirty years after the Peloponnesian War, that the city became vulnerable. 
Nor were there important battles at Byzantium (the later Constantinople and the still later Istanbul), though it occupied a strategic position at the straits between the Aegean Sea and the Black Sea, not very far from where Troy had once been situated. 


We banish theeÖ




When Alcibiades continues to plead the soldier's cause, the First Senator, austere and obdurate in Roman rather than Athenian manner, finally says: 


Do you dare our anger?

'Tis in few words, but spacious in effect:

We banish thee for ever.





óAct III, scene v, lines 95-97 


In actual history, Alcibiades was indeed banished from Athens, but not for so personal and trivial a cause. In 415 b.c. he had urged that Athens end the long war with Sparta by a very daring move, nothing less than an invasion of Sicily and the capture of its chief city, Syracuse, which had been supporting the Spartan cause financially. 
A victory in Sicily would have transferred Syracuse's navy and wealth to the Athenian side, given Athens a secure base in the west, and broken the morale of the Spartan coalition. It was a desperate gamble, but under Alcibiades it might just possibly have succeeded. 
The Athenians, however, voted another general, Nicias, as co-com-mander, and this was a terrible mistake. Nicias was an "appeaser," anxious to make a deal with Sparta, and couldn't possibly be expected to supply vigorous leadership-especially since he was a most incompetent general in any case. 
To make matters worse, just before the expedition was to set sail, certain religious statues in the city were blasphemously mutilated, and suspicion fell upon Alcibiades, who was a known agnostic.
To be sure, Alcibiades would scarcely have been so insane as to have chosen this time to play the scofier in so ostentatious a manner. Although the mystery of who mutilated the statues has never been solved, most historians feel it must have been Alcibiades' enemies who did it, and that Alcibiades was framed. 
At first, proceedings against Alcibiades were ordered suspended till the Sicilian expedition was over, but then after the fleet got under way, the Athenians changed their mind and recalled Alcibiades. Alcibiades was certain that he couldn't possibly escape conviction and so he went voluntarily into exile. 
The Sicilian expedition, be it noted, came to utter grief without him. A huge Athenian force, both men and ships, was utterly destroyed and Athens never truly recovered. She was never again, after the Sicilian expedition, what she had been before it. Because it was Alcibiades who had urged it on, he had brought great harm to Athens (as Timon, according to Plutarch, had foreseen) and was yet to do more. 


Ö hated be of TimonÖ




Back we go to Timon's house, where Timon has called back his friends for another banquet. All the men who had just refused to lend Timon money are now back at their old places. They don't know how Timon has managed to recover, but if he is conducting feasts, they intend to be at the trough. 
They are as servile as ever and Timon appears as affable as ever, but when it is time to eat of the covered dishes, Timon reveals them to be full of water and nothing more. Timon throws the water in their faces, curses them, and drives them away, crying out: 


Burn house, sink Athens, henceforth hated be

Of Timon man and all humanity.





óAct III, scene vi, lines 105-6 


There is the transition. Timon goes from universal benevolence to universal malevolence. In both roles, he has held himself far removed from ordinary mankind, but in the latter he at least requires no wealth. 
Timon leaves his home and the city. He finds himself a cave outside Athens and spends his time in cursing. He digs and finds gold (a device borrowed from Lucian's dialogue), but that does not soften his hardened heart or soothe his poisoned soul.


This fell whoreÖ




Now a parade of people comes seeking Timon in the cave. (After all, he is rich again.) The first, by accident rather than by design, for Timon's wealth is not yet known, is Alcibiades, who is marching against Athens at the head of a rebel army and who at first fails to recognize Timon. 
Alcibiades is accompanied by two prostitutes whom Timon does not fail to condemn. He says to Alcibiades concerning one of them: 


This fell whore of thine

Hath in her more destruction than thy sword,

For all her cherubin look.





óAct IV, scene iii, lines 62-64 


The "fell whore" in question is Phrynia, whose name is inspired by a famous Athenian courtesan named Phryne who flourished in the time of Alexander the Great, a century after Alcibiades. She grew immensely rich from her earnings, for she had as her customers the most distinguished men of the time and she charged healthy fees. The most famous story told of her is that once when she was brought before a court, accused of profaning certain religious rites, she exposed her breasts to the judges and was acquitted on the spot. 


Ö proud Athens on a heap




Alcibiades expresses sympathy for Timon, offers him money, and begins: 


When I have laid proud Athens on a heap-





óAct IV, scene iii, line 102 


The historical Alcibiades, when he fled Athens, went to Sparta, his city's bitter enemy, and there advised that enemy how best to conduct its war. For a period of time he virtually directed Sparta's armies, much more intelligently and effectively than Spartan generals had been able to do. In that sense, Alcibiades was marching against Athens. 
But when, in the play, Alcibiades talks of destroying Athens, Timon interrupts to wish him all success in that task, together with the destruction of himself afterward. And before they go, he heaps bitter speeches on the courtesans as he gives them quantities of his own gold.


The middle of humanity. ..




Apemantus now comes in. The old and practiced Cynic can now bandy insults with the new-made Misanthropes. Shakespeare bases this on a tale of Plutarch's, intending to show how Timon, in his universal hatred, outdid the Cynics. He tells how Apemantus once, when dining with Timon, they two being all the company, commented on how pleasant it was to feast alone without hated mankind present, and Timon answered morosely, "It would be, if you were not present." 
Thus, when in the play Apemantus offers to give Timon food, and mend his diet, Timon says: 


First mend my company, take away thyself,





óAct IV, scene iii, line 284 


But Apemantus is not fooled. He was not impressed by Timon playing god, and he is not impressed by Timon playing dog. (It is odd that in English, god and dog are the same letters in mirror image.) Apemantus says, cynically: 


Art thou proud yet?





óAct IV, scene iii, line 278 


He says even more sharply: 


The middle of humanity thou never knewest,

but the extremity of both ends.





óAct IV, scene iii, lines 301-2 


The rumor of Timon's gold spreads. Thieves come to relieve him of it, but he gives it to them with such malevolent glee at the harm it will do them that they leave most uneasily. 
His old steward, Flavius, arrives weeping, and asks only to continue to serve Timon. Even Timon's withered heart is touched and he is forced to retreat one inch from his universal hatred. He says: 


I do proclaim

One honest man.

Mistake me not, but one.





óAct IV, scene iii, lines 505-6 


Here Timon seems to have faced mankind and found himself momentarily to be neither god nor dog, but "the middle of humanity." Had he found himself permanently back to that middle, the play might have been more satisfactory, but Shakespeare blunders onward through the thicket of unrelieved misanthropy. 


Ö hang himself




The Poet and the Painter arrive to get their share of the gold by pretending selfless love of Timon, but Timon overhears their plotting and drives them away. 
Then come Athenian Senators, pleading with Timon to take over the leadership of the city's forces in order to turn back Alcibiades, who is battering at the city's walls, but Timon states bitterly that he doesn't care what Alcibiades does to Athens. Shakespeare now makes use of still another anecdote in Plutarch. 
He announces one favor he will do Athens. He has a tree that he is about to chop down, but he urges the Senators to announce to all Athenians who wish to take advantage of the offer to: 


Come hither ere my tree hath felt the ax,

And hang himself.





óAct V, scene i, lines 212-13 


Those enemies of Timon's. ..




Timon dies, unreconciled to the end, and Athens must surrender to Alcibiades. 
This did not happen quite so in history. 
Rather, Alcibiades finally fell out with the Spartans (the story is that he was a little too familiar with one of the Spartan queens and the Spartan King resented it) and returned to Athenian allegiance. They welcomed him back because the war was going more and more badly and they needed him. In 407 b.c. he made a triumphant return to Athens and in that sense, Athens might be viewed as having surrendered to him. 
The Athenians, however, could never bring themselves to trust him, and the next year he was exiled again, this time permanently. 
The play does not go that far. It ends with the reconciliation, as Alcibiades says: 


Those enemies of Timon's and mine own

Whom you yourselves shall set out for reproof,

Fall, and no more.





óAct V, scene iv, lines 56-58 


Alcibiades lets himself be placated and reconciled, where Timon did not, and it is plain that the former is displayed as the preferable course. 
Timon is dead by then, but the epitaph he wrote for himself is brought in and Alcibiades reads it-Timon's final word (taken from Plutarch). 


Here lie I, Timon, -who alive all living men did hate.

Pass by and curse thy fill, but pass, and stay not here thy gait.





óAct V, scene iv, lines 72-73 








6. The Winter's Tale


The winter's tale is a romance. It has no historical basis whatever and none of the events it describes ever occurred; nor are any of its characters to be found in history, however glancingly. Nevertheless, its background lies in the pre-Christian Greek world. I therefore include it among the Greek plays. 
It seems to have been one of Shakespeare's latest plays, too, having been written as late as 1611. The only later play for which Shakespeare was solely responsible was The Tempest. 


.., the King of Sicilia means to pay Bohemia Ö




The play opens with two courtiers exchanging graceful compliments. The scene is set in Sicilia (Sicily) and one of the courtiers, Camillo, is native to the place. The other is a vistor from Bohemia. 
The occasion is a state visit paid to Sicily by the King of Bohemia, and there may be a return visit in consequence. Camillo says: 


I think this coming summer the King of Sicilia

means to pay Bohemia the visitation

which he justly owes him.




óAct I, scene i, lines 5-7 


There is a queer reversal here. Shakespeare takes the plot from a romance written in 1588 by the English writer Robert Greene, entitled Pandosto. The Triumph of Time. In Greene's original romance the story opens with a visit of the King of Sicily to Bohemia, rather than the reverse. This reversal is carried all through the play, with the King of Sicily in The Winter's Tale playing the role of the King of Bohemia in Pandosto, and vice versa. 
Did Shakespeare make a casual slip of the pen to begin with and then carry it through because he was too lazy to take the trouble to correct it? Or did he have some good reason?-I suspect the latter. 
The King who is being visited behaves, in the first portion of the play, as an almost psychotically suspicious tyrant. Should this king be the King of Bohemia, as in Greene, or the King of Sicily, as in Shakespeare?
Suppose we look back into history. In 405 b.c., just ten years after the ill-fated Sicilian expedition of Athens (see page I-140), a general, Dionysius, seized control over Syracuse, the largest and strongest city of Sicily. By 383 b.c. he had united almost the entire island under his rule. 
Dionysius is best known for the manner in which he kept himself in power for thirty-eight years in an era when rulers were regularly overthrown by palace coups or popular unrest. He did so by unending suspicion and eternal vigilance. For instance, there is a story that he had a bell-shaped chamber opening into the state prison, with the narrow end connecting to his room. In this way, he could secretly listen to conversations in the prison and learn if any conspiracies were brewing. This has been called the "ear of Dionysius." 
He arrested people on mere suspicion and his suspicion was most easily aroused. Naturally, he left the memory of himself behind in most unsavory fashion and though he died in peace, he is remembered as a cruel and suspicious tyrant. 
If Shakespeare had to choose between Bohemia and Sicily as a place to be ruled by a tyrant, was it not sensible to choose Sicily? 
Of course, King Leontes of Sicily, the character in the play, is not to be equated with Dionysius. The Sicilian tyrant of old may simply have made Sicily seem the more appropriate scene for tyranny, but there all resemblance ends and nothing in the play has any relationship to the life of Dionysius. 
Nevertheless, because of this tenuous connection between Leontes and Dionysius, and the fact that Dionysius lived a generation after Timon, I am placing this play immediately after Timon of Athens. 
As for BohemiaÖ Later in the play there will be scenes of idyllic pastoral happiness in the kingdom of the visiting monarch. Shall that other kingdom then be Sicily, as in Greene, or Bohemia, as in Shakespeare? 
To be sure, in ancient times Sicily was an agricultural province that served as the granary of early Rome. It might therefore be viewed as an idyllic place in contrast to citified and vice-ridden Rome itself. However, Sicily was also noted for its brutal wars between the Greeks and Carthage and, later, the Romans and Carthage. Still later, it was the scene of horrible slave rebellions. 
What of Bohemia by contrast? The Bohemia we know is the westernmost part of modern Czechoslovakia and is no more a pastoral idyll than anywhere else. This Bohemia is inhabited by a Slavic people, in Shakespeare's time as well as in our own, and its origin, as a Slavic nation, dates back to perhaps the eighth century, something like a thousand years after the time of Dionysius. 
This discrepancy in time did not bother Greene, or Shakespeare either, and would not bother us in reading the play. However, is it necessarily our 
the winter's tale 149 
present real-life Bohemia that Shakespeare was thinking of? Was there another? 
Shortly after 1400, bands of strange people reached central Europe. They were swarthy-skinned nomads, who spoke a language that was not like any in Europe. Some Europeans thought they came from Egypt and they were called "gypsies" in consequence. (They still are called that in the United States, but their real origin may have been India.) 
When the gypsies reached Paris in 1427, the French knew only that they had come from central Europe. There were reports that they had come from Bohemia, and so the French called them Bohemians (and still do). 
The gypsy life seemed gay and vagabondish and must have been attractive to those bound to heavy labor or dull routine. The term "Bohemian" therefore came to be applied to artists, writers, show people, and others living an unconventional and apparently vagabondish life. Bohemia came to be an imaginary story land of romance. 
Well then, if Shakespeare wanted a land of pastoral innocence and delights, should he pick Sicily or Bohemia? -Bohemia, by all means. 


Ö tremor cordis.. .




The courtiers let the audience know that Leontes of Sicily and Polixenes of Bohemia were childhood friends and have close ties of affection. In the next scene, when the two kings come on stage themselves, this is made perfectly clear. 
Polixenes has been away from home for nine months and pressing affairs must take him away. Leontes urges him strenuously to remain, and when Polixenes is adamant, the Sicilian host asks his Queen, Hermione, to join her pleas with his. She does, and after joyful badinage, Polixenes gives in. 
Then, quite suddenly, without warning at all, a shadow falls over Leontes. He watches his gay Queen and the friend she is cajoling (at Leontes' own request) and he says in an aside: 


Too hot, too hot!

To mingle friendship far is mingling bloods.

I have tremor cordis on me...




óAct I, scene ii, lines 108-10 


An unnatural physical effect, a palpitation of the heart ("tremor cordis") has come over him. A sickness, an abnormality, makes of the genial host, without real cause, a jealous tyrant. 
The sickness grows on itself. He wonders if he has been cuckolded (see page I-108) and is at once convinced he is. He seeks supporting opinion and consults his courtier, Camillo, who listens in horror and recognizes the situation as a mental illness: 


Good my lord, be cured

Of this diseased opinion, and betimes,

For 'tis most dangerous.




óAct I, scene ii, lines 296-98 


Ö sighted like the basilisk




Camillo's clear wisdom is greeted by Leontes with a howl of rage. The King makes it clear that if Camillo were a loyal subject he would poison Polixenes. Reluctantly, Camillo agrees to accept the direct order, provided the King will then offer no disgrace to his Queen. 
By now, however, Polixenes notes that the warm friendship that had surrounded him but a short time ago has vanished and he is aware of an intensifying frigidity. He meets Camillo and questions him but Camillo can only speak evasively, and still in the metaphor of sickness: 


I cannot name the disease; and it is caught

Of you, that yet are well.





óAct I, scene ii, lines 387-88 


He is referring, of course, to the insane jealousy of which Polixenes is the unwitting and undeserved cause. Polixenes cannot understand and says: 


How caught of me? Make me not sighted

like the basilisk. I have looked on

thousands, who have sped the better

By my regard, but killed none so.





óAct I, scene ii, lines 388-91 


Another name for the basilisk is the cockatrice, a word that may have originated as a distortion of crocodile. The medieval European had little contact with crocodiles, though he had heard of them in connection with the distant Nile. 
The crocodile, like the serpent, is a deadly reptile. It might almost be viewed as a gigantic, thick snake, with stubby legs. To Europeans, unfamiliar with the crocodile except by distant report, the snaky aspects of the creature could easily become dominant. 
Once "cockatrice" is formed from "crocodile," the first syllable becomes suggestive, and the fevered imagination develops the thought that the monster originates in a cock's egg and is a creature with a snake's body and a cock's head. 
The cockatrice is pictured as the ultimate snake. It kills not by a bite but merely by a look. Not merely its venom, but its very breath is fatal. Because the cockatrice is the most deadly snake and therefore the king of snakes, or because the cockscomb may be pictured as a crown, the cockatrice came to be called "basilisk" (from Greek words meaning "little king"). 
Camillo cannot resist Polixenes' pleadings for enlightenment. He advises the Bohemian King to flee at once. Since Camillo is now a traitor, saving the man he was ordered to kill, he must fly also. Together, they leave Sicily. 


A sad tale's best.. .




Meanwhile, at the court, Mamilius, Leontes' little son, is having a pleasant time with the ladies in waiting. His mother, Hermione, it now turns out, is rather late in pregnancy. (Polixenes, remember, had been at the Sicilian court for nine months.) 
The Queen asks her son for a story, and Mamilius says: 


A sad tale's best for winter; I have one

Of sprites and goblins.





óAct II, scene i, lines 25-26 


There's the reference that gives the play its title. The play is a sad tale of death-but also of rebirth. For winter does not remain winter always, but is followed by the spring. 


Ö sacred DelphosÖ




The childish tale is interrupted by the arrival of the King and his courtiers. Leontes has learned of Polixenes' flight with Camillo and that is the last straw. He accuses Hermione of adultery and orders her to prison. 
Neither her indignant and reasonable claims to innocence nor the shocked testimony of faith in her on the part of his own courtiers will turn Leontes in the slightest. His tyranny is in full course now. 
But he will go this far-he will rely on divine assurance. He says: 


/ have dispatched in post

To sacred Delphos, to Apollo's temple,

Cleomenes and Dion Ö





óAct II, scene i, lines 182-84 


This more than anything else proves the play to be placed in ancient Greek times, when the oracle at Delphi (not Delphos) was in greatest repute. 
The oracle, a very ancient one, was located on the Greek mainland about six miles north of the center of the Gulf of Corinth and seventy miles northwest of Athens. Its location was originally called Pytho and it contained a shrine to the earth goddess that was served by a priestess known as the Pythia. This priestess could serve as the medium through which the wishes and wisdom of the gods could be made known. 
The oracle, along with the rest of Greece, was inundated by the Dorian invasion that followed after the Trojan War. When Greece began to climb out of the darkness in the eighth century b.c., Pytho had a new name, Delphi, and the nature of the shrine had changed. It served Apollo rather than the earth goddess. 
Greek myths were devised to explain the change. 
Those myths told that when the Titaness Latona (Leto) was about to give birth to children by Jupiter, the jealous Juno made her life miserable in a variety of ways. She sent a dragon or giant snake, named Python, to pursue her, for instance. Eventually Latona bore twin children, Apollo and Diana. Apollo made his way back to Pytho, where the Python made its home, and killed it. Apollo then took over the shrine itself and gave it its new name (though the priestess remained the Pythia). 
For centuries Delphi remained the most important and sacred of all the Greek oracles. It was beautified by gifts made to it by all the Greek cities and many foreign rulers. It served as a treasury in which people and cities kept their money for safekeeping, since no one would dare pollute the sacred shrine by theft. 
On the other hand, there is also a place called Delos, a tiny island no larger than Manhattan's Central Park, located in the Aegean Sea about a hundred miles southeast of Athens. 
It too is involved with the tale of Latona and her unborn children. Juno, who was persecuting Latona in every way possible, had forbidden any port of the earth on which the sun shone to receive her. Tiny Delos, however, was a floating island which Jupiter covered with waves so that the sun did not shine on it. There Apollo and Diana were born. Thereafter, Delos was fixed to the sea floor and never moved again. 
As a result, Delos was as sacred to Apollo as Delphi was, and it was easy to confuse the two. Thus, one could imagine the oracle at Delphi to be located on the island of Delos, and speak of the combination as the "island of Delphos." Greene does this in Pandosto and Shakespeare carelessly follows him. 


Ö Dame Partlet. ..




In prison, Hermione is delivered of her child and it turns out to be a beautiful little girl. Paulina, the wife of the courtier Antigonus, is a bold woman with a sharp tongue. Passionately loyal to Hermione and uncaring for the consequences, she offers to take the child to Leontes in the hope that the sight of the babyish innocence might soften him. 
With the child, Paulina forces her way into Leontes' presence. He won't look at the child and cries out impatiently to Antigonus: 


Give her the bastard,

Thou dotard, thou art woman-tired, unroosted

By thy Dame Partlet here.





óAct II, scene iii, lines 72-74 


This refers to an extremely popular medieval cycle of animal stories, in which human failings are placed in animal guise, a device that dates back to Aesop in the Western tradition. The cycle is known as a whole as "Reynard the Fox," for the fox is the rascal hero (much like Br'er Rabbit in the Uncle Remus stories). 
The tales reached their final form about 1100 and grew so popular that some of the names of the animals entered the common language. Even more familiar than "Reynard" for fox is "Bruin" for bear, for instance. 
"Dame Partlet" is the hen and Leontes is saying in angry, insulting tones that Paulina is an old biddy who has henpecked her foolish husband into giving up the roost; that is, the dominating position in the house. 
Antigonus can scarcely deny it at that. When Leontes tells him he should be hanged for not quieting his wife, Antigonus says, resignedly: 


Hang all the husbands

That cannot do that feat,you'll leave yourself

Hardly one subject.





óAct II, scene iii, lines 108-10 


"Ö of high treasonÖ"




Leontes' madness continues in full course. He orders Antigonus to carry off the baby girl to some desert spot and leave it there to die. 
The King then gets news that Cleomenes and Dion, the ambassadors to the Delphos, are returning, and he hastens to prepare a formal trial for the Queen. She is brought out of prison to face her indictment. The officer of the court reads it out: 


"Hermione, Queen to the worthy Leontes,

King of Sicilia, thou art here accused and arraigned

of high treason, in committing adultery with

Polixenes, King of Bohemia, and conspiring with

Camillo to take away the life of our sovereign lord the

King, thy royal husband. ..





óAct III, scene ii, lines 12-17 


There must have seemed a strange familiarity in this scene to Englishmen, for scarcely three quarters of a century before, not one but two English queens had stood accused of a very similar charge. These were two of the six wives of Henry VIII (who had died in 1547, seventeen years before Shakespeare's birth). One was Anne Boleyn, Henry's second wife, tried for adultery in 1536, and the other was Catherine Howard, his fifth wife, tried for adultery in 1542. Both were convicted and beheaded, the former at the age of twenty-nine and the latter at the age of about twenty-two. 


The Emperor of RussiaÖ




Again Hermione defends herself with dignity and sincerity, carrying conviction to all but the insane Leontes. While she waits for the word of the oracle, she says: 


The Emperor of Russia was my father.

Oh that he were alive, and here beholding

His daughter's trial!





óAct III, scene ii, lines 117-19 


Russia was not, of course, in existence in the time when Sicily was under Greek domination. The Russian people first swam into the light of history in the ninth century when Viking adventurers from Sweden took over the rule of the land and established a loose congeries of principalities under the vague overlordship of Kiev. This "Kievan Russia" was destroyed in 1240 by the Mongol invasion. 
A century before Shakespeare's birth, however, Russia was beginning to emerge from the Mongol night. In 1462 Ivan III ("the Great") became Grand Prince of Muscovy. He managed to annex the lands of Novgorod, a northern city, which controlled the sparsely settled lands up to the Arctic Ocean. This first gave Muscovy a broad realm, larger in terms of area than that of any other nation in Europe. With that, Muscovy became Russia. 
In 1472 Ivan married the heir to the recently defunct Byzantine Empire and laid claim to the title of Emperor. 
His successors, Basil III and Ivan IV ("the Terrible"), continued the policy of expansion. Ivan IV, who reigned from 1533 to 1584 (through Shakespeare's youth, in other words), defeated the remnant of the Mongols and extended the Russian realm to the Caspian Sea. 
Not only did Ivan the Terrible's victories put Russia "on the map," but during his reign England gained personal knowledge of the land. In 1553 an English trade mission under Richard Chancellor reached Ivan's court, so that Shakespeare's reference to "The Emperor of Russia" was rather topical. 


"Hermione is chaste Ö"




Cleomenes and Dion now bring in the sealed message from Delphos. It is opened and read. It states: 


"Hermione is chaste, Polixenes blameless,

Camillo a true sub ject,Leontes a jealous tyrant,

his innocent babe truly begot ten, and the

King shall live without an heir,

if that which is lost be not found"





óAct III, scene ii, lines 130-33 


This is clear, straightforward, and dramatic-and lacks all resemblance to the kind of oracles actually handed out by the real Delphi. In fiction, oracles may interpret present and foretell future with faultless vision; in actual fact, they can do nothing of the sort. 
The real oracle at Delphi was extremely practiced at giving out ambiguous statements that could be interpreted as correct no matter what the eventuality. The most famous example of this (though by no means the only one) took place in 546 b.c. when Croesus of Lydia, in western Asia Minor, was considering a preventive attack on the growing Persian kingdom to the east of the Halys River, Lydia's boundary. 
Croesus consulted the oracle at Delphi, of which he was one of the most munificent patrons. He was told: "When Croesus passes over the river Halys, he will overthrow the strength of an empire." 
Croesus attacked at once, and realized too late that the oracle was carefully phrased so as to remain true whether he won or lost. He lost and it was his own realm that was overthrown. It is for reasons such as this that "Delphic" and "oracular" have come to mean "evasive," "ambiguous," "double-meaning."


Apollo, pardon




And still Leontes does not give in. Like Pharaoh in the Bible, his heart hardens with each new thrust and he dismisses the statement of the oracle as falsehood. 
But at this very moment a servant rushes in to say that Leontes' young son, Mamilius, ill since his mother was arrested, has died. At the news, Hermione faints and Paulina declares she is dying. 
The King is stricken. The death of his son at the instant of his blasphemy against Apollo punishes that blasphemy and demonstrates the truth of the oracle ("the King shall live without an heir") simultaneously. 
As suddenly as the disease of jealousy had seized upon him, it leaves him. In one moment, he is sane again, and cries out in heartbreak: 


Apollo, pardon

My great profaneness 'gainst thine oracle.





óAct III, scene ii, lines 150-51 


He is anxious now to undo all he has done, but he cannot bring Mamilius back to life, he cannot unkill the Queen, he cannot find the child he has ordered exposed. He is doomed to live in endless remorse until "that which is lost" be found. 
He can only bow his racked body before the harsh and indignant vituperation of Paulina. 


Ö The deserts of Bohemia




But what of Antigonus and the little baby girl he had been ordered to expose? 
In Pandosto the child is given to sailors by the Bohemian King. These take her to the sea and expose her in a boat during a storm. The boat, carrying the child, is carried to the seacoast of Sicily. 
But Shakespeare has reversed the kingdoms. It is the Sicilian King, Leontes, who hands out the girl to be exposed. If the reversal is to continue, the ship must land on the seacoast of Bohemia, rather than that of Sicily, and so it does. Act III, scene iii has its scene set on "Bohemia, the seacoast." 
The trouble with this is that while Sicily has a seacoast on every side, Bohemia-the real Bohemia-both in our day and in Shakespeare's is an inland realm and has no seacoast. It is, in fact, two hundred miles from the closest seacoast, at Trieste (nowadays part of Italy). 
Shakespeare must have known this, of course, but what difference does it make, when Bohemia is not a real land at all, but is the Bohemia of idyll, and may have a seacoast just as well as it may have anything else? 
Of course, if we want to be literal, there was a time when the real Bohemia had a seacoast. It was at the height of its power under the reign of Ottokar II ("the Great"), who ruled from 1253 to 1278. In 1269, at a time when the Holy Roman Empire was going through a period of weakness, Ottokar conquered what is now Austria and ruled over an enlarged Bohemia that stretched over much of central Europe, right down to the head of the Adriatic Sea. For four years, then (before the Holy Roman Empire regained these lost lands), and four years only, from 1269 to 1273, Bohemia had a seacoast in the neighborhood of modern Trieste. 
The ship carrying Antigonus and the baby reaches land and Antigonus says to the sailors: 


Thou art perfect then our ship hath touched upon

The deserts of Bohemia?





óAct III, scene iii, lines 1-2 


By "deserts" Antigonus merely means an unoccupied region. If we are not contented with Bohemia as an imaginary kingdom but insist on the real one, we can pretend that Bohemia has its mid-thirteenth-century boundaries and that the ship has landed near Trieste. This is not bad. It would mean that Antigonus traveled from Sicily, through the length of the Adriatic Sea, a distance of some seven hundred miles. 
Antigonus has seen Hermione in a dream and she has bidden him name the little girl Perdita ("the lost one"). He puts the baby down together with identifying materials, in case she should happen to be found and brought up. But even as he makes his way back to the ship, he encounters a bear and there follows the most unusual direction in Shakespeare's plays, for it reads "Exit, pursued by a bear." 


Ö things new born




As Antigonus leaves, an old Shepherd and then his son come on the scene. The son is referred to in the cast of characters as "Clown," but in its original meaning of "country bumpkin." 
The Clown has seen the ship destroyed by a storm and Antigonus eaten by the bear, but the Shepherd has found Perdita and says to his son: 


Now bless thyself; thou met'st with things dying,

I with things new bom.





óAct III, scene iii, lines 112-13 


It is the turning point of the play. Until now, the theme of the play has been a kind of dying, as Leontes went insane and drove person after person into flight, exile, or death. But the winter's tale is over and the spring begins, for Perdita the pretty child will not die. She has been found by the Bohemian shepherds and she will live. 


Ö slide o'er sixteen yearsÖ




There comes a huge lapse of time between Act III and Act IV. The lapse is necessary and also occurs in Pandosto, which has as its secondary title The Triumph of Time. 
This is a particularly radical violation of the "unities." There were three of these, according to the prescription in Aristotle's Poetics. There was the unity of time, since the entire action of a play should take no more than twenty-four hours; of place, since the entire action should be in one place; and action, since every incident in the play should contribute to the plot and there should be no irrelevancies. 
These classical unities were taken up by the French dramatists of the seventeenth century, when France was the cultural leader of Europe. 
Shakespeare could adhere to the unities if he chose (he did so, almost entirely, in The Comedy of Errors) but he felt no compulsion about it. His plays veered widely from place to place and covered events that took up the course of years. His plays had plots and subplots and occasional total irrelevancies. For this, he was sneered at by the classicists, who considered his plays to be crude, formless, and barbaric, though not without a kind of primitive vigor. 
We don't think so at all nowadays. The observance of the unities can go along with great power in the hand of a genius. (No one can fault Sophocles' Oedipus Rex, which observes them rigorously.) On the other hand, in the hand of anyone less than a genius, the unities almost force tedium on a play, as they make it necessary to report action at an earlier time and a different place entirely through reports, so that all the play consists of one character explaining to another (for the benefit of the audience) what has happened or what is happening. 
Shakespeare let time and place flash across the stage and by piling scene upon scene with spatial and temporal jumps lent his plays such a whirlwind speed that an audience could not help but be enraptured with action that never stopped and never allowed them to catch their breath. 
Yet even Shakespeare must have felt that at this point in The Winter's Tale he might be going a little too far. (He had done much the same in Pericles, see page I-195, which he had written a year or two earlier.) He brings in Time as a kind of chorus, opening the Fourth Act, explaining the lapse of time and apologizing for it too: 


Impute it not a crime

To me, or my swift passage, that I slide

O'er sixteen yearsÖ





óAct IV, scene i, lines 4-6


Ö Florizel I now name to you. ..




Time mentions one specific involved in the passing of years-the existence of a son of Polixenes. He had been casually mentioned early in the play, but he is now named for the first time. Time says: 


I mentioned a son o'th'King's, which Florizel

I now name to you...





óAct IV, scene i, lines 22-23


We can suspect, if we have the slightest experience with romances, that Florizel will fall in love with the grown-up Perdita, so that a king's son will woo a girl who is (to all appearances) a shepherd's daughter. 
This happens, of course, and "Florizel" became the epitome of the "Prince Charming," the handsome man who comes to sweep the poverty-stricken young girl out of her cottage and into the palace. Heaven only knows how many marriages have been ruined because real life could not fulfill the dreams of romance-fed girls. 
To at least one actual woman there was a kind of literal fulfillment. In the early 1780s an actress named Mary Robinson was wooed by a rather dissipated young man, who called her Perdita and himself Florizel in the letters he sent her. He happened to be the Prince of Wales, the eldest son of King George III of England. He later became Prince Regent during his father's madness and King George IV in 1820 upon his father's death. 
He never married Miss Robinson, of course, and he was a poor excuse for a Florizel anyway, except for his rank, as he became fatter, grosser, and more dissipated with each successive year. He was a most unlovable man and very unpopular with his subjects. 


Ö named me AutolycusÖ




But we are in mythical Bohemia now, where Polixenes, grown older, is as virtuous as he ever was and still cherishes the good Camillo. Camillo longs to see Sicily again, for the repentant Leontes calls for him. Polixenes will not release him, however, and suggests instead that they find out why Prince Florizel haunts a certain shepherd's cottage. 
But Bohemia contains more than virtue. Striding onstage is a peddler, singing happily. He makes his living by being a petty thief and confidence man. He says: 


My father named me

Autolycus, who being, as I am, littered under

Mercury, was likewise a snapper-up of unconsidered trifles.





óAct IV, scene iii, lines 24-26 


Mercury (Hermes) was the god of thieves. It was appropriate, therefore, that there be myths involving a description of the clever thefts carried through by the god. 
Thus, almost immediately after he was born, Mercury killed a tortoise, made the first lyre out of it, and used that to sing a lullaby that put his mother, the nymph Maia, to sleep. Freed of her supervision he went out into the world, found a herd of fifty cattle belonging to Apollo, and stole them, placing improvised shoes on their feet to confuse the tracks and forcing them to walk backward to make them seem to have gone in the opposite direction. 
The furious Apollo found them at last and saw through Mercury's defense of being an innocent babe. Mercury could only placate him by giving Apollo the lyre. 
Mercury, incidentally, was the patron god not only of thieves but of merchants as well, which indicates the rather mixed opinion that the ancients had of merchants-possibly with some justice. 
A son of Mercury was Autolycus, who, like his father, was a master thief. He could steal cattle undetectably and helped himself to the herds of Sisyphus. As Sisyphus watched his herds melt away, he found himself suspecting Autolycus without being able to obtain proof. He therefore made markings on the soles of his cattle's hoofs and eventually found Autolycus in possession of cattle on whose hoofs were marked "Stolen from Sisyphus." 
Autolycus' daughter married Laertes of Ithaca and their son was none other than Ulysses (see page I-92), who was the epitome of all that was shrewd and clever. 
The peddler Autolycus in the play glories in his name and what that signifies and has a chance to demonstrate it at once. The Clown comes along, on his way to buy things for the great sheepshearing festival that is about to take place. Autolycus promptly pretends to have been robbed and beaten by a rogue, and the kindly Clown, helping him, has his pocket picked as a reward.


Ö but Flora




Back at the shepherd's cottage, Perdita, now a beautiful girl of sixteen, is the mistress of the feast and is dressed accordingly. Prince Florizel, overcome by her beauty, says to her: 


These your unusual weeds to each part of you

Do give a life; no shepherdess, but Flora,

Peering in April's front.





óAct IV, scene iv, lines 1-3 


Flora was the Roman goddess of flowers and the spring. Her festival was celebrated at the end of April and the beginning of May. 


Ö the green Neptune




But Perdita is very nervous. Florizel stumbled upon her father's house when pursuing an escaped falcon and has fallen in love with her. Now he is attending the feast dressed as a shepherd and calling himself Doricles. Perdita fears his father the King will find him out and be furious. But Florizel says that even the gods stooped to low appearances for love: 


Jupiter

Became a bull, and bellowed; the green Neptune

A ram, and bleated; and the fire-robed god,

Golden Apollo, a poor humble swain,

As I seem now.





óAct IV, scene iv, lines 27-31 


Jupiter (Zeus) fell in love with Europa, a princess of Phoenicia. To win her, he turned himself into a snow-white bull and joined the Tyrian herd. Europa saw the new bull and was fascinated by it. It proved so gentle, she climbed on its shoulders at last, whereupon it ambled to the sea, plunged in, and swam westward. It arrived at Crete (a tidy swim of 550 miles) and there he eventually had three sons by her. 
As for Neptune (Poseidon), called "green" because he was god of the sea, he loved Theophane. To steal her away from her other suitors, he turned her into a ewe and himself into a ram. Their offspring was a golden ram which, after death, yielded the famous Golden Fleece for which Jason adventured. 
Apollo (called "fire-robed" and "golden" because he was god of the sun) had once offended Jupiter by killing the Cyclops, who forged the lightning which served as Jupiter's spears. Apollo was condemned to serve a Thessalian king, Admetus, as shepherd for punishment. Admetus treated the temporarily demoted god with every consideration, and in return, Apollo, still in shepherd's disguise, helped Admetus accomplish certain difficult tasks required for the winning of the beautiful Alcestis. 


Ö Dis's wagon




Perdita's fears are well based, for Polixenes and Camillo do indeed come to the sheepshearing festival to spy on Florizel/Doricles' doings. They are greeted warmly by the unsuspecting Perdita in her role as hostess, and appropriate flowers are handed out. Perdita bemoans the lack of spring flowers that she might give the young ladies and says: 


O Proserpina,

For the flow'rs now, that, frighted, thou let'st fall

From Dis's wagon.





óAct IV, scene iv, lines 116-18 


Dis (Hades) had abducted Proserpina while she was picking flowers in the fields of central Sicily (see page I-7). She dropped those flowers as she was carried, shrieking, into the underworld. 


Ö Cytherea's breath




Perdita describes some of these flowers, saying, for instance: 


Ö violets, dim,

But sweeter than the lids of Juno's eyes,

Or Cytherea's breath;





óAct IV, scene iv, lines 120-22 


Cytherea is an alternate name for Venus (Aphrodite). It comes from the island of Cythera off the southeast tip of the Greek mainland. On that island, as in Paphos (see page I-15), Venus had a well-known temple. Some versions of Venus' birth state that she rose from the sea, and, of course, some place the point of the rising near Paphos and some near Cythera. 


Ö a tawdry-lace Ö




The disguised Polixenes and Camillo can't help but be taken by the pretty and sweet Perdita. The shepherds and shepherdesses dance; gaiety expands; and suddenly Autolycus appears at the door as a singing peddler and ballad seller. 
The Clown, who is in love with Mopsa, a shepherdess, wants to buy her something, but he has reneged on previous promises and Mopsa says to him impatiently: 


Come, you promised me a tawdry-lace,

and a pair of sweet gloves.





óAct IV, scene iv, lines 250-51 


The expression "tawdry-lace" has a rather complicated background. It dates back to Anglo-Saxon England, much of which in the seventh century was still pagan. Egfrith, King of Northumbria, had a wife named Etheldreda, who listened with interest to Christian missionaries. She became a nun and established a religious community on land in her father's kingdom of East Anglia, becoming its first abbess in 673. 
Etheldreda was eventually sainted and her name day, October 17, was celebrated at the site of the convent with a large fair, which drew crowds of the peasantry. With time, the Anglo-Saxon name of the saint was shortened to Audrey, so that it was the Fair of Saint Audrey that was celebrated. 
At these fairs there was a brisk sale of souvenirs (as in modern fairs), and, in particular, cheap jewelry and showy lace could be bought-nothing really valuable, but strong on garish colors and elaborate frills. By further slurring the name of Saint Audrey, one came to speak of "tawdry lace," for instance, in connection with a cheap and showy specimen of that material. As a consequence, "tawdry" has now come to refer to anything of low quality that is cheap and tasteless. 


Ö than DeucalionÖ




Ballads are talked of and a dance of satyrs is presented. It is all pas-torally delightful, but Polixenes and Camillo, still in disguise, grow less and less happy. They encourage the disguised Florizel (who does not recognize them) to tell his love. He does so, in complete abandon, and is willing to pledge betrothal to Perdita on the spot, and before witnesses, a deed that is equivalent to marriage. 
Polixenes asks Florizel if he has a father who might attend the wedding. Florizel admits he has but says flatly that his father must remain ignorant of this. At that, Polixenes, in a passion, strips off his disguise. He threatens the Shepherd with death, and Perdita with mutilation to mar her beauty. He says further that if his son ever as much as thinks of Perdita again-


Ö we'll bar thee from succession;

Not hold thee of our blood, no not our kin,

Farre [farther] than Deucalion off.





óAct IV, scene iv, lines 433-35 


Deucalion was a legendary ruler of southern Thessaly, and might be termed the Greek Noah. Zeus had sent a great flood over the earth to wipe out the human race, but Deucalion (warned by his father, the Titan Prometheus) built an ark in which he and his wife, Pyrrha, rode out the flood, coming to rest on Mount Parnassus after it was over. 
They then prayed that mankind might be renewed and were told by a divine voice to turn their heads away and throw the bones of their mother behind them. The two reasoned that Mother Earth was meant. Turning their heads away they threw stones over their shoulder. The stones Deucalion threw became men and those Pyrrha threw women. 
In this way the race of men and women could trace their descent to Deucalion and Pyrrha, and all men were related to at least the extent of being common descendants of Deucalion-except that Polixenes was going to deny Florizel even that much if he disobeyed. 


Ö make for Sicilia




Polixenes leaves, but Florizel is not disturbed. He intends to marry Per-dita even if it means losing his kingdom. Camillo, much impressed by Perdita and longing to see his own country, now plans to do for Florizel what sixteen years before he had done for Florizel's father-help him escape and go with him. Florizel has prepared a ship for the escape and Camillo says, earnestly: 


Ö make for Sicilia,

And there present yourself and your fair princess

(For so I see she must be) 'fore Leontes.





óAct IV, scene iv, lines 547-49 


To get Florizel as far as the ship, Camillo disguises him in different fashion by making him change clothes with Autolycus, who now comes on the scene glorying in the success of his ballad selling and pocket picking. 
The Shepherd and his son, the Clown, having been threatened with death by the King, are meanwhile in a state of abject terror. The Clown urges his father to reveal the fact that Perdita is not really a relative by showing the relics that had been found with her. In this way, the Shepherd and the Clown, proving not to be related to the real criminal in this matter of the enchantment of the prince, might escape punishment. 
Autolycus overhears this and (in Florizel's clothes) pretends he is a courtier and easily cons the poor bumpkins into coming with him. He decides to bring them to Florizel on a gamble that this may bring him advancement. 


Great Alexander Ö




For the last act the scene shifts back to Sicily, where Leontes' life is one long, wretched repentance. His courtiers are urging him to marry again, for the land is without an heir and the perils of civil war loom. 
Paulina, however, the wife of old Antigonus, who had been eaten by a bear, is against it. The oracle from "Delphos" had predicted that the King would remain without an heir till "that which is lost" be found. Paulina considers this to mean the long-ago-exposed girl. She says to Leontes: 


Care not for issue,

The crown will find an heir. Great Alexander

Left his to th'worthiest: so his successor

Was like to be the best.





óAct V, scene i, lines 46-49 


Actually, this was a poor analogy. When Alexander the Great died suddenly in 323 b.c. (about two generations after the time of Dionysius of Syracuse, at which time I have arbitrarily placed the action of this play) at the age of thirty-three, he left behind a termagant mother, a foreign wife, a mentally retarded half brother, a half sister, and an unborn child. Not one could serve as a successor and the natural choice would therefore have rested among the very capable generals who had been trained by Alexander and his father, Philip. 
Alexander might have chosen any one of the generals and his dying vote might have fixed that general in the throne and brought about the consolidation of the new and gigantic Macedonian Empire, changing the history of the world. Unfortunately, Alexander (for whatever reason) is supposed to have said, with his last breath, "To the strongest" when asked to whom he left his Empire. 
If there had been a strongest, that would have been well, but there wasn't. No one general was strong enough to defeat and dominate all the rest. The result was that for thirty years a civil war raged among the generals. At the end, Alexander's Empire was worn out and fragmented. The fragments continued to war against each other with the result that within three centuries of Alexander's death, the eastern half of his Empire was retaken by native tribes and the western half was taken by Rome. 
Surely this is not the fate for Sicily that Paulina was urging on Leontes.
In fact, she has other plans. She urges Leontes to vow never to marry anyone not chosen by herself. Leontes, who can never punish himself sufficiently, agrees. 


Ö from Libya




Florizel is now introduced, arriving in Sicily with Perdita. Leontes greets the young man tearfully and inquires, with wonder, of the beautiful Perdita. Florizel, attempting to mask the truth as deeply as possible, says: 


Good my lord,

She came from Libya.





óAct V, scene i, lines 156-57 


Libya was the name given by the ancient Greeks to the entire north African coast west of Egypt. The two chief cities of Libya in the time of Dionysius of Syracuse were Cyrene, a Greek city five hundred miles to the southeast of Sicily, and Carthage, a non-Greek city, a hundred miles to the southwest. 


Ö Julio RomanoÖ




Events hasten now. Even while Florizel is embroidering his lie by making Perdita the daughter of a Libyan king, news arrives that Polixenes and Camillo are in Sicily. Polixenes sends a message demanding the arrest of Florizel. 
However, the audience need not be alarmed. It is at once revealed that the Shepherd and the Clown are also in Sicily and they can reveal the truth of Perdita's identity. 
What happens next is offstage. We would think that there should be a grand reconciliation scene as Perdita is shown to be Leontes' daughter, and there is, but not onstage. We learn of it only through a discussion among three Gentlemen. 
This is odd and we might speculate that in the original form of the play the recognition and restoration of Perdita was the climax. Perhaps this ending turned out to be weak-after all, a very similar climax had been used only a year or two before by Shakespeare in Pericles (see page I-199). Pressure might have been applied to Shakespeare to make some alteration in that ending. 
As a result, Shakespeare thrust Perdita's recognition offstage and prepared an even more dramatic scene involving Queen Hermione. 
Paulina had reported her dead in Act III, and there has been no hint since that the report was wrong. Indeed, at the end of Act III, when An-tigonus is taking the little baby girl off to exposure, he dreams that Hermione's ghost appears to him, and this would make it seem that Shakespeare really did consider her dead.
Shakespeare, in his revision (assuming there was one), did not trouble to go back and put in some indication of Hermione's remaining alive, nor does he expunge the reference to the ghost, which is useful in explaining the name "Perdita." 
Instead, he begins at this late date in the fifth act to start preparing the audience. The Third Gentleman mentions, for the first time, a statue: 


Ö the Princess, hearing of her mother's statue,

which is in the keeping of Paulina-a piece many years

in doing and now newly performed

by that rare Italian master, Julio Romano Ö





óAct V, scene ii, lines 101-5 


Julio Romano was a real Italian artist, known for his painting rather than for his sculpture, who had died in 1546, a little over half a century before The Winter's Tale was written. This is a startling anachronism, of course. 
The Second Gentleman adds another vital item in the new build-up. Concerning Paulina, he says: 


she hath privately, twice or thrice a day,

ever since the death of Hermione,

visited that removed house.





óAct V, scene ii, lines 113-15 


Of course, the statue turns out to be the living Hermione after all. Why she has been kept from the so repentant King for sixteen years and been condemned to a life of solitary imprisonment; why Paulina has undertaken the backbreaking task of feeding and caring for her and keeping the secret; why the King has not had curiosity to see the progress of the statue during all the "many years" in which it was being made-these points are not explained. All this lack of explanation lends substance to the theory that the last half of the fifth act is a new ending, patched on imperfectly. 
There is the final reconciliation scene and all ends in happiness. Paulina (who has now learned of her husband's death) marries Camillo, and even the Shepherd and the Clown now find themselves enriched, so that Au-tolycus, swearing to reform, is taken under their protection. 








7. The Comedy Of Errors


The comedy of errors may possibly be the very first play Shakespeare wrote, perhaps even as early as 1589. 
It is a complete farce, and it is adapted from a play named Menaechmi, written by the Roman playwright Titus Maccius Plautus about 220 b.c. If we assume that the events in Plautus' play reflect the time in which it was written (although Plautus borrowed the plot from a still earlier Greek play) we can place the time a century and a half after that of Dionysius of Syracuse. It is for that reason I place this play immediately after The Winter's Tale. 
Plautus' play Menaechmi tells of the comic misadventures of twin brothers separated at birth. One searches for the other and when he reaches the town in which the second dwells, finds himself greeted by strangers who seem to know him. There are constant mistakes and cross-purposes, to the confusion of everyone on the stage and to the delight of everyone in the audience. 
Shakespeare makes the confusion all the more intense by giving the twin brothers each a servant, with the servants twins as well. The developments are all accident, all implausible, and-if well done-all funny. 


Merchant of Syracusa.. .




The play begins seriously enough in Ephesus. Solinus, Duke of Ephesus, appears onstage, with Egeon, a merchant of Syracuse. The title "Duke of Ephesus" is as anachronistic as "Duke of Athens" (see page I-18) and with even less excuse, since there never was a Duchy of Ephesus in medieval times as there was, at least, a Duchy of Athens. 
There is hard feeling between Ephesus and Syracuse, to the point where natives of one are liable to execution if caught in the territory of the other. The Syracusan, Egeon, caught in Ephesian territory, stands in danger of this cruel law. The Duke says, obdurately: 


Merchant of Syracusa, plead no more;

I am not partial to infringe our laws.





óAct I, scene i, lines 3-4


In the time of Plautus, the Greek city-states were as logically the scene of romantic comedy as were the Italian city-states in Shakespeare's own time. In both cases, the city-states were in decline but lingered in a golden afterglow. 
Syracuse was no longer as great as it had been under Dionysius. It lived rather in the shadow of the growing Roman power, with which it had allied itself in 270 b.c. 
In the course of the Second Punic War, fought in Plautus' middle age, Rome looked, for a while, as though it were going to lose, when the Carthaginian general Hannibal inflicted three spectacular defeats upon it between 218 and 216 b.c. Syracuse hastily switched to the Carthaginian side in order to be with the winner, but this proved to be a poor move. 
Rome retained sufficient strength to lay siege to Syracuse and, after more than two years of warfare, took and sacked it in 212 b.c. Syracuse lost its independence forever. Plautus may have written Menaechmi in the last decade of Syracusan independence, but even if he wrote after its fall, it is not hard to imagine him as seeing it still as the important city-state it had been for the past five centuries. 
For the other city, Plautus did not use Ephesus (as Shakespeare does) but he could have. Ephesus is a city on the Aegean coast of Asia Minor. Asia Minor fell under the control of various Macedonian generals after the death of Alexander the Great in 323 b.c., but individual cities flourished and retained considerable powers of local self-government. Indeed, Ephesus, in Plautus' lifetime, was geographically part of the kingdom of Pergamum, which made up the western third of the peninsula of Asia Minor. The city was at the very peak of its wealth and its commercial prosperity. 
Of course, neither was in a position to carry on petty feuds with each other, and there is no historical basis for the opening situation in the play-but that is just to get the story moving. 


To Epidamnum.. .




Duke Solinus points out that the penalty for being caught in Ephesian territory is a thousand marks. In default of payment of the fine, Egeon must be executed. 
Egeon seems to think death will be a relief and the curious Duke asks why. Egeon sighs and begins his tale. In Syracuse, he had married a woman he loved: 


With her I lived in joy, our wealth increased

By prosperous voyages I often made

To EpidamnumÖ





óAct I, scene i, lines 38-41


Epidamnum (or Epidamnus) was a Greek city-state on what is now the coast of Albania; on the site, indeed, of Durres, Albania's chief port. 
Epidamnum is, actually, the other city used by Plautus, in place of Shakespeare's Ephesus, and in a way it is more suitable. Epidamnum is three hundred miles northeast of Syracuse; Ephesus twice as far; and one might suppose that the nearer neighbors two cities are, the more likely they are to quarrel. 
Epidamnum became Roman in 229 b.c., so that Plautus was writing the play not long after the end of the city's independence. 
Why did Shakespeare switch from Epidamnum to Ephesus? Perhaps because Ephesus was far more familiar to Christians. Two centuries after Plautus' death it became one of the centers of the very early Christian church. One of the letters in the New Testament attributed to St. Paul is the Epistle to the Ephesians. 


Of CorinthÖ




At one point, though, Egeon had had to make a long stay at Epidamnum, and after six months his wife followed him there, although she was nearly at the point of giving birth. In Epidamnum she was delivered of twin sons in an inn where a lowborn woman was also being delivered of twin sons. Egeon bought the lowborn twins as slaves for his own sons. 
They then made ready to return home, but were caught in a bad storm not far off Epidamnum. When the ship was deserted by its crew, Egeon's wife tied one child and one servant child to a small mast and Egeon tied the other child and the other servant child to another mast. For security, they tied themselves to masts as well and waited for the ship to be driven to land. 
What's more, rescue seemed close: 


The seas waxed calm, and we discovered

Two ships from jar, making amain to us;

Of Corinth that, of Epidaurus this.





óAct I, scene i, lines 91-93 


Corinth was located on the narrow isthmus that connected the Peloponnesus to the rest of Greece. This favored position gave it a footing that placed it on the sea, looking east toward Asia Minor and also looking west toward Italy. Throughout Greece's history it remained one of its most important cities and one of its most prosperous parts. In Plautus' lifetime it was the wealthiest city in Greece. That prosperity was destroyed for a century when Roman forces, for inadequate reasons, sacked it in 146 b.c., a generation after Plautus' death.
Epidaurus was a Greek city-state on the eastern shores of the Peloponnesus, only twenty-five miles from Corinth. It would spoil the effect of the story to have two ships come from such closely spaced cities. 
Fortunately, there is another Epidaurus (or, in this case, Epidaurum), which is located on the eastern shore of the Adriatic Sea, some 130 miles up the coast from Epidamnum. That gives us our picture. The wrecked ship, not far from Epidamnum, is being approached by a ship from Epidaurus, sailing from the north, and by another ship from Corinth, sailing from the south. 
Before the rescuers can reach the ship on which Egeon and his family are adrift, that ship hits a rock and is split in two. Egeon, with one son and servant child, is picked up by the ship from Epidaurus; his wife, with the other son and servant child, is picked up by the ship from Corinth. The two ships separate and the family is permanently split in two. 


Ö farthest Greece




Egeon and his half of the family return to Syracuse, but the other half of the family has proceeded to some destination unknown to him and he never hears of them again. 
Egeon's son and his servant, once grown, want to try to find their twins. They leave on the search, and after they are gone for a period of time, Egeon sets out in his turn to find them: 


Five summers have 1 spent in farthest Greece,

Roaming clean through the bounds of Asia,

And coasting homeward, came to Ephesus,





óAct I, scene i, lines 132-34 


"Greece" had a broader meaning in ancient times than it has today, and "Asia" a narrower one. Greece (or "Hellas" as the Greeks, or Hellenes, themselves called it) was the collection of the thousand cities of Greek-speaking people, whether those cities were located on the Greek peninsula proper or elsewhere. From Massilia (the modern Marseilles) on the west, to Seleucia on the Tigris River on the east, all is "Greece." Egeon had thus been searching not just Greece proper but wherever the Greek tongue was spoken. 
As for Asia, this term was applied in Roman times (and in the New Testament, for instance) not to the entire Asian continent in the modern sense, but to the western half of Asia Minor only, the territory of the kingdom of Pergamum actually. Egeon, scouring Asia Minor, would naturally return to Syracuse by way of Ephesus, the largest city of the region. 
The Duke is affected by the sad story, but insists that it is either a thousand marks or death. 


Ö stay there, DromioÖ




Egeon and his listeners get off the stage and now the coincidences begin, for his son and servant, the very ones for whom he is searching, have just landed in Ephesus; while his wife and other son and servant, for whom the first son and servant are searching, have been in Ephesus all the time. The entire family is in the same city and no one guesses it till the very end of the play, although that is the obvious and only way of explaining the extraordinary things that are to happen. 
Indeed, everyone is extraordinarily obtuse, for the merchant who has brought the Syracusan son to Ephesus warns him: 


Therefore, give out you are of Epidamnum,

Lest that your goods too soon be confiscate.

This very day a Syracusian merchant

Is apprehended for arrival here,





óAct I, scene ii, lines 1-4 


Does the son ask who this Syracusian (a countryman, after all) might be? No, for if he does, the plot is ruined. The events can only follow if no character in the play ever sees the plainest point, and the audience must co-operate and accept the obtuseness for the sake of its own pleasure. 
The son has a supply of money with him which he orders his servant to deposit for safekeeping at the inn where they are to stay: 


Go bear it to the Centaur, where we host,

And stay there, Dromio, till I come to thee;





óAct I, scene ii, lines 9-10 


It is stated by Egeon, but not explained, that both servants bore the same name. This is necessary since even if the twins' faces were alike, the confusion could only be complete if their names were alike too. This identity in names passes the bounds of the credible, yet it must be accepted or else all must be given up. 
The servants are both named Dromio, which comes from a Greek word meaning "racecourse." It is appropriate, for all through the play each servant is sent racing, now on this errand, now on that, usually coming to grief, for they are forever meeting not their master but their master's twin, without realizing it. 
As for the masters, they are both named Antipholus, from Greek words meaning "opposed in balance." They are so alike, in other words, that if each were placed on the opposite end of a balance, the balance would remain unmoved. 
In order to identify them in the play, the masters have to be called "Antipholus of Syracuse" and "Antipholus of Ephesus." The servants are "Dromio of Syracuse" and "Dromio of Ephesus." 
It is Antipholus of Syracuse who sends Dromio of Syracuse to the Centaur. 


.. .as I am a Christian.. .




Dromio of Syracuse runs off and Antipholus of Syracuse explains to the merchant that he is in search of his mother and twin brother. Suddenly Dromio of Ephesus races on the scene. His master, Antipholus of Ephesus, is a married man and dinner at home is waiting for him. Dromio of Ephesus sees Antipholus of Syracuse and begs him to come home. 
Antipholus of Syracuse naturally wants to know what home and what dinner Dromio is talking about and why he hasn't stayed at the Centaur and what happened to the money. Just as naturally, Dromio of Ephesus wants to know what money. 
Now here is Antipholus of Syracuse madly searching for a twin brother with a twin-brother servant, and here comes what seems to be his servant who obviously is talking about an utterly inappropriate set of events. Ought not Antipholus of Syracuse instantly suspect it as his servant's twin brother mistaking him for his own twin brother? 
Not at all. The thought never occurs to Antipholus of Syracuse (or to Dromio of Syracuse) for an instant, even though these cross-purposes multiply. (Antipholus of Ephesus and Dromio of Ephesus are more to be excused. They are not consciously looking for their twins and so they are mentally unprepared to consider the twins' existence as explanation for the errors.) 
As the cross-purposes continue (and they require each set of twins to wear identical costumes, if any further multiplication of implausibility is required), Antipholus of Syracuse cries out: 


Now, as I am a Christian, answer me,

In what safe place you have bestowed my money;

Or I shall break that merry sconce of yours





óAct I, scene ii, lines 77-79 


Here, certainly, we depart from Plautus, in whose lifetime Christianity had not yet arisen. -And since Dromio of Ephesus can give no satisfaction, he is beaten.


Ö war against her heir




The cross-purposes continue and grow worse. Antipholus of Syracuse hastens to the Centaur, finds his money safe there, and calculates it was impossible to have seen Dromio when he had seen him. (Does he suspect? Not on your life!) 
In comes Dromio of Syracuse and Antipholus of Syracuse asks him if he has recovered his senses. Dromio of Syracuse naturally doesn't know what he is talking about and denies that he ever denied he had the gold. So he is beaten too. (The Dromios are constantly being beaten for no fault of their own.) 
In comes Adriana, the wife of Antipholus of Ephesus, and the wife's sister, Luciana. They accost Antipholus of Syracuse and demand he come home to dinner with them. Antipholus of Syracuse is flabbergasted and suspects witchcraft (he suspects anything and everything but the obvious fact that his twin brother is involved), yet eventually accompanies the two women. 
Now, at last, Antipholus of Ephesus appears on the scene, ordering a necklace from a Merchant for his wife. He is further complaining that Dromio of Ephesus (who is with him) is telling some ridiculous story about himself denying that he is married. 
Antipholus of Ephesus invites the Merchant home for dinner and when they reach his house they find the doors barred. Voices within insist that Antipholus of Ephesus is an imposter, for the master of the house is within and at dinner. Dromio of Ephesus and Dromio of Syracuse even engage in conversation (with a closed door between) and suspect nothing. 
Antipholus of Ephesus, in high rage, thinking his wife is entertaining some lover, decides to take the necklace and give it to a courtesan rather than to his wife. 
Indoors, meanwhile, Antipholus of Syracuse is attracted to Luciana, the wife's sister, and she, embarrassed, urges him to be sweet and kind to his wife instead. When she leaves, Dromio of Syracuse enters and tells his master that a fat cook claims him as her husband. 
The two of them, Antipholus of Syracuse and Dromio of Syracuse, begin a satirical (and to our modern ears, cruel) catalogue of the charms of the lady. 
Dromio of Syracuse says she is as spherical as a globe and that countries could be located on her. Antipholus of Syracuse begins to test this, in Shakespeare-contemporary manner, all thought of the supposedly Greek background forgotten. Thus he inquires about Ireland and America, though neither was known in Plautus' time. 
The answer to one of the questions offers a possible way of dating the play. Antipholus of Syracuse asks about the location of France on the cook's body and Dromio replies: 
176 GREEK 


In her forehead, armed and reverted,

making war against her heir.





óAct III, scene ii, lines 126-27 


The reference must be to Henry IV, who in 1589 had become King of France on the death of his second cousin, Henry III. However, Henry IV was a Protestant and Catholic France (in particular, Catholic Paris) would not accept him. For several years France made "war against her heir." 
Henry IV won an important victory at Ivry in 1590 and then in 1593 abjured Protestantism and accepted Catholicism. Between his victory and his repentance, enough of the Catholic opposition was won over to end the war. Since Dromio of Syracuse makes it sound as though the revolt is continuing, one can suppose that The Comedy of Errors was written no later than 1593 and no earlier than 1589. 


Ö the mermaid's song




Antipholus of Syracuse continues to suppose that witchcraft is at work and decides to get out of Ephesus on the first ship. He sends Dromio of Syracuse to locate such a ship. 
Antipholus dislikes the woman who claims to be his wife and feels a strong attraction to her sister, which, he suspects, is a specific result of enchantment. He feels he must not give in to all this: 


But, lest myself be guilty to self-wrong,

I'll stop mine ears against the mermaid's song.





óAct III, scene ii, lines 168-69 


Here is another example of a reference to the dangerous singing of the mermaids or sirens (see page I-12). 


Ö in Tartar limboÖ




The cross-purposes continue. The Merchant from whom Antipholus of Ephesus has ordered a chain meets Antipholus of Syracuse and forces it on him, refusing to take money at the moment, saying he will take it at suppertime. Antipholus of Syracuse plans to be gone from the city by suppertime but the Merchant will not listen. 
However, the Merchant unexpectedly encounters a creditor of his own and decides to get the money sooner. This time it is Antipholus of Ephesus he meets, coming from the courtesan's place with Dromio of Ephesus.
This Antipholus sends his servant to buy a rope, with which he intends to chastise his wife and servants for locking him out of the house. 
The Merchant asks for his money and Antipholus of Ephesus denies receiving the chain. The Merchant is so enraged at this denial that he calls in the police and demands that Antipholus of Ephesus be arrested. 
It is at this point that Dromio of Syracuse arrives with the news that he has located a ship leaving Ephesus. Antipholus of Ephesus knows nothing about a ship and Dromio of Syracuse knows nothing about a rope. Antipholus of Ephesus has no time, however, to worry about this particular cross-purpose. He needs bail and he sends Dromio of Syracuse to his wife's place to get the money. 
In delivering the message, Dromio of Syracuse explains to Adriana that his master is in trouble: 


Ö he's in Tartar limbo, worse than hell:





óAct IV, scene ii, line 32 


The Greek notion of the afterlife in Hades was a rather gray one. It was a place of shadows where the shades of men and women remained in weakness and forgetfulness; where they suffered no torture but experienced no joy. 
Beneath this colorless Hades was Tartarus (see page I-13), which helped inspire later Christian theologians with their notion of hell. In place of the mild Hades itself, Christians imagined a region called limbo at the border of hell. This receives its name from the Latin word for "border" and, like Hades, is a gray place of no punishment and no hope. 
We might say, then, that in the Christian sense, hell is worse than limbo, while in the Greek sense, Tartarus is worse than Hades. To say, as Dromio does, that "Tartar limbo" is "worse than hell" is a queer mixture of terms that probably tickled an audience more aware of these theological and classical distinctions than moderns are. 


Ö Lapland sorcerers Ö




Antipholus of Syracuse, still waiting for news of a ship, still impatient to be gone, marvels at how everyone seems to know him and think highly of him. 


Sure, these are but imaginary wiles,

And Lapland sorcerers inhabit here.





óAct IV, scene iii, lines 10-11 


Lapland is an ill-defined area making up the Arctic regions of Scandinavia and northwestern Russia, inhabited by Lapps, who are the Old World equivalent of the New World Eskimos. They might easily be confused, in Shakespeare's time, with the Finns of Finland, for Lapps and Finns are similar in race and language. 
The comment of Antipholus of Syracuse would seem to refer to Finland rather than Lapland, for Finnish mythology is unusual in the emphasis it places on song and magic. Their heroes are magicians rather than strong men, Merlin rather than Hercules. The most famous Finnish literary work is their national epic, the Kalevala, which is pre-Christian in inspiration and the hero of which is the singing magician Wainamoinen. 


Satan, avoid,..




The apparent enchantments continue. Dromio of Syracuse comes panting in with the money given him by Adriana to bail Antipholus of Ephesus. Dromio of Syracuse hands it to Antipholus of Syracuse, who naturally doesn't know what it is. He asks about the ship instead and Dromio of Syracuse insists he has already given him that news. 
In comes the courtesan to whom Antipholus of Ephesus has promised the chain. She sees it around the neck of Antipholus of Syracuse and asks for it. Antipholus answers violently: 


Satan, avoid! I charge thee, tempt me not!





óAct IV, scene iii, line 49 


The harassed Antipholus of Syracuse, already convinced he is the victim of witchcraft, is sure that the light wench is the devil himself come to tempt him to sin. The exclamation is a form of Jesus' reproof to Satan on the occasion of the temptation in the wilderness. Jesus is then quoted as saying "Get thee hence, Satan" (Matthew 4:10). 
(When Shakespeare quotes the Bible, he cannot very well quote the exact wording of the King James version with which we ourselves are so familiar. That version was not published till 1611, some twenty years after The Comedy of Errors was written and nearly at the close of Shakespeare's writing career.) 
The courtesan naturally decides he is mad and goes off to warn his wife. 


Ö the kitchen vestal. ..




Meanwhile, Antipholus of Ephesus is still waiting for the bail which Dromio of Syracuse delivered to Antipholus of Syracuse. In comes Dromio of Ephesus with the rope that he had been sent for just before Antipholus of Ephesus had been arrested. Naturally he gets beaten. 
Adriana and Luciana arrive now with the courtesan. With them they bring a schoolmaster, Mr. Pinch, whom they hope is wise enough to cure Antipholus of Ephesus of his madness. Antipholus of Ephesus, to whom it seems the rest of the world is mad, is driven to distraction by this. 
He insists that, despite his wife's protestations, he had been barred from his own house at dinner. He calls on Dromio of Ephesus to confirm this and for once master and man are on the same side. When Antipholus of Ephesus points out that the very kitchenmaid railed at him, Dromio of Ephesus says: 


Certes, she did; the kitchen vestal scorned you.





óAct IV, scene iv, line 76 


The vestals were the Vestal Virgins (see page I-33) but this can scarcely be taken to mean that the kitchenmaid was a virgin. In Shakespeare's time, this was scarcely likely if she was over twelve. Apparently it is only a comically high-flown way of saying that she was in charge of the fire, as the vestals were in charge of the sacred fire. 


Ö Circe's cup




But there is further trouble. Antipholus of Ephesus still wants to know where the bail money is and Luciana says she sent it. Dromio of Ephesus denies that he received it or that he was even sent for it, and Antipholus of Ephesus, in his rage, begins to act mad indeed. He and Dromio of Ephesus are seized and dragged away. 
In come Antipholus of Syracuse and Dromio of Syracuse on their way to the waterfront. The Merchant, who has just had Antipholus of Ephesus arrested, sees him apparently at liberty, with the chain for which he was arrested openly around his neck. There is a fight and Antipholus of Syracuse and Dromio of Syracuse escape into a nearby abbey. The Abbess emerges and refuses to let anyone else enter. 
But the day is coming to a close. (This play and The Tempest are the only two plays in which Shakespeare kept the action within the bounds of a single day in accordance with the Greek "unities"-see page I-158.) Egeon is being led to his death, since he has not been able to raise the thousand marks he has been fined. Adriana seizes the opportunity to accost the Duke of Ephesus and beg him to persuade the Abbess to release her poor, mad husband. 
But Antipholus of Ephesus and Dromio of Ephesus have escaped from their own jailers and have come furiously on the scene. Antipholus of Ephesus demands justice against his wife, who, he claims, is conspiring to imprison him after having barred him from his own house. 
The Duke, listening to the babble of confusing testimony from all sides, says: 


Why, what an intricate impeach is this!

I think you all have drunk of Circe's cup.





óAct V, scene i, lines 270-71 


Circe is the name of a sorceress who appears in the Odyssey. She lived on a Mediterranean island and had visitors drink wine from her cup. The drink would turn them into animals, who were then enslaved by her. 
Ulysses' men, in the course of their return from fallen Troy, come to Circe's island, drink from her cup, and are changed into swine. Ulysses himself, with the help of an antidote supplied him by Mercury, overcomes her. 
The Duke, by this reference to Circe's cup, implies that all about him have lost their ability to reason but are as confused as senseless beasts. 
Egeon interrupts to say the man seeking redress is his son Antipholus. But it is Antipholus of Ephesus he indicates and that Antipholus at once denies any knowledge of Egeon. The Duke backs him up, saying he has known Antipholus of Ephesus all his life and that Antipholus has never been in Syracuse. (The Duke is as dull as the rest; he doesn't catch on either.) 
It is only when the Abbess emerges with Antipholus of Syracuse and Dromio of Syracuse, and the two Antipholuses and Dromios face each other, that all is clear at last. The Abbess turns out, of course, to be Egeon's wife. 
All the conflicting events of the day are sorted out; Egeon is liberated; and the play ends in utter happiness. It is even clear that Antipholus of Syracuse will marry Luciana so that the two brothers will also be brothers-in-law. 








8. Pericles, Prince of Tyre


The date of this play is usually given as 1608, and the last three acts are characteristically late Shakespearean in style. The first two acts are, however, considered much inferior, and many critics feel that, except for a touch here and there, they were not written by Shakespeare. 
Whether that is so or not, the play, as it stands, is included in the collections of Shakespeare's plays and, for better or worse, will forever bear his name. 


Ö ancient GowerÖ




The play begins with an Introduction. An old man comes on stage and says: 


To sing a song that old was sung,

From ashes ancient Gower is come,





óAct I, Introduction, lines 1-2 


John Gower was a fourteenth-century English poet (c. 1330-1408) and a friend and contemporary of Chaucer's (see page I-54). Gower was considered by his contemporaries, though not by moderns, to have been almost Chaucer's equal, and though it might be thought they would have borne each other the ill will of competitors, they did not. They dedicated books to each other. 
One of Gower's principal works is Confessio Amantis (Confession of a Lover), first published in 1383. In this work, a number of romances are told in English couplets. The tales are by no means original with Gower. What he does is retell stories from ancient and medieval sources, choosing the most popular ones. 
In the eighth book of Confessio Amantis Gower tells a tale, taken from a Greek source, of which a version is presented in this play. A prose version of the same story, "The Pattern of Painful Adventures," was published in 1576 by Laurence Twine. Some scenes in Pericles are drawn from Twine, but Gower is the major influence.
It is only in this play and in The Two Noble Kinsmen (see page I-54) that Shakespeare so openly announces his source. 


Ö Antiochus the great




Gower lays the scene of the play: 


This Antioch, then; Antiochus the great

Built up this city for his chiefest seat,

The fairest in all Syria-





óAct I, Introduction, lines 17-19


This alone tells us that the time in which the tale is supposed to take place is in the Hellenistic period; that is, in the couple of centuries that followed the death of Alexander the Great. In this period, Greek-language monarchies were established in Egypt and western Asia. 
The largest of these was established south and east of Asia Minor in 321 b.c. by Seleucus I, who had been one of Alexander's generals. The realm is, in his honor, usually called the Seleucid Empire in the histories. 
Seleucus had made his first capital in ancient Babylon, but quickly abandoned it as too alien and un-Greek. In its place, he constructed Seleucia on the Tigris, about twenty miles north of Babylon. It became a thoroughly Greek city. 
Although the Empire covered vast tracts of what are now the nations of Iraq, Iran, and Afghanistan, the portion most under the influence of Greek culture and therefore most valued by the Greek-speaking and Greek-cultured descendants of Seleucus was the westernmost part, commonly called Syria by the Greeks. 
In Syria Seleucus founded a city which served as his western capital and named it Antiocheia, after his father, Antiochus. In English, we know it as Antioch. It was located fifteen miles from the sea, near the northeastern corner of the Mediterranean, and is now located in southwestern Turkey. 
About a century and three quarters after the founding of the Seleucid Empire, almost all the eastern provinces had fallen away and come under the rule of native princes. What was left of the Greek kingdom was concentrated in the westernmost provinces and what had been the Seleucid Empire came more and more to be called simply Syria. 
Despite the vicissitudes of the Empire, however, Antioch continued to grow and became a great metropolis. In the days of the Roman Empire, when Rome had finally absorbed the last remnant of the Seleucid realm, Antioch was the third largest city of the Empire. Only Rome itself and Alexandria in Egypt were larger.
The question is, now, which monarch is referred to by Gower as "Antiochus the great"? It is no use to try to decide by the actual events of the play, since these are all fictitious. 
There were thirteen monarchs of the Seleucid kingdom named Antiochus, but one of them, the third of the name, did call himself Antiochus the Great. This Antiochus III ruled from 223 to 187 b.c. In the first part of his reign, he brought back into the Seleucid fold (very temporarily) some of the large eastern provinces that were breaking away, marching through the east almost like another Alexander in doing so. It was this which gave him the idea of calling himself "the Great." 
Once that was accomplished, he attempted to annex Egypt, which was governed by a boy king at the time, and also Asia Minor. Had he succeeded, he would have united almost all of Alexander's Empire under his rule. 
Unfortunately for himself, Antiochus HI fell afoul of the rising power of Rome. Challenging that Western nation, he invaded Greece, but was defeated there in 191 b.c. The Romans followed him into Asia Minor and defeated him again in 190 B.C. Antiochus ended his reign in defeat and failure. 
Considering that in Pericles Antiochus the Great is pictured as ruling in magnificence and glory (at least at the beginning), we might arbitrarily place the fictitious events of this play about 200 b.c. This is twenty years after the suggested time of A Comedy of Errors and so Pericles becomes the eighth and last of Shakespeare's Greek plays. 


Ö her to incestÖ




Gower goes on to explain that "Antiochus the great" was left a widower with a beautiful daughter: 


With whom the father liking took,

And her to incest did provoke.





óAct I, Introduction, lines 25-26 


Incest is treated here as a horrible and unspeakable crime, and so it is considered in most societies; though, it must be admitted, not in all. The Egyptian Pharaohs routinely married their sisters, feeling perhaps that only their sisters had blood aristocratic enough to make a marriage suitable. (Or perhaps it was a relic of matrilineal descent; of the times when the nature of fatherhood was not understood and when property could only be inherited through the mother. By marrying his sister, the Pharaoh could make sure that the sister's son, who later was to inherit the throne, would also be his own.)
After the death of Alexander the Great, one of his generals, Ptolemy, seized Egypt and established the "Ptolemaic kingdom." For nearly three centuries Egypt was ruled by his descendants, all of whom were named Ptolemy. The Ptolemies carefully adhered to Egyptian customs in order to remain popular with their subjects. Ptolemy II took for his second wife, for instance, his full sister, Arsinoe. As a result, first she, and then he, received the surname Philadelphus ("sibling lover"). He did not have children by her. Cleopatra, the last of the Ptolemaic rulers of Egypt (see page I-318), was married in turn to two of her brothers, though each marriage was purely formal, for both were children at the time of the marriage. 
Furthermore, in the Persian dominions in the days before Alexander's conquest, nicest was not abhorred and father-daughter unions were allowed. Antiochus the Great ruled over most of the core of the old Persian Empire. It is not on record that he followed Persian custom in this respect, but that old custom may have been in the mind of the anonymous Greek writer who first invented the tale which worked its way down the centuries and came to rest in Shakespeare's Pericles. 


Ö Prince of Tyre. ..




To keep his luscious daughter from the princely suitors that sought her hand, Antiochus forced all to attempt to solve a riddle. Failure to solve the riddle was punished with death and numerous suitors had already suffered that penalty. 
The play itself begins before the palace at Antioch, where a young suitor has come to present himself for the hand of the princess. Antiochus says: 


Young Prince of Tyre, you have at large received

The danger of the task you undertake.





óAct I, scene i, lines 1-2 


Tyre is a city on the Mediterranean coast, about 220 miles south of Antioch. It is much the more ancient of the two cities, for it was a flourishing town in the thirteenth century b.c. when the ancient Egyptian Empire was at its height. 
Tyre was an important port of the Canaanites, who were called Phoenicians by the Greeks. Its ships ventured far through the Mediterranean, founding what eventually became the still greater city of Carthage on the north African shore. Tyrian ships even ventured outside the Mediterranean, reaching Britain on the north and, as one tale has it, circumnavigating the African continent to the south.
Tyre's stronghold was on a rocky island off the shore and this, combined with her navy, kept her secure against the land-based empires of Asia. She maintained her independence not only against David's Israelite Empire but against the much more dangerous Assyrian and Chaldean empires. Nebuchadrezzar subjected it to a thirteen-year siege from 587 to 574 b.c. and managed only a partial victory. 
The real end of Tyre's independence came in 332 b.c., when one much greater than Nebuchadrezzar banged against its gates. This was Alexander the Great himself. He had been sweeping through Asia Minor with scarcely any resistance and was now heading toward Egypt, when Tyre unexpectedly refused to yield. Even Alexander required seven full months to take Tyre, and when he completed the job, he was vengeful enough to have ten thousand of its citizens executed and another thirty thousand sold into slavery. 
Although Tyre recovered to some extent, it remained only a shadow of its former self, first under the Ptolemies of Egypt, then under the Seleucid Empire, and finally under the Roman Empire. 
It was in 198 b.c., just about the suggested time of the events of this play, that Antiochus the Great wrested the southern part of Syria from Egypt. 
Tyre vanished from the view of western Europe after the breakup of the Roman Empire, but reappeared in the time of the Crusades. The Crusaders captured it in 1124 and for over a century it remained one of the chief cities of the Christian "Kingdom of Jerusalem." When the Crusaders were finally driven out of the East, Tyre was destroyed. A small village, still bearing the old name, exists on its site now, in southern Lebanon. 
The original Greek version of the story of Pericles is lost, but a Latin prose romance based on that Greek version exists. It begins with the incest and riddle of Antiochus, and the young man who comes to win the princess is "Apollonius of Tyre." The "of Tyre" merely means he was born there, or lives there. To make him Prince of Tyre is an anachronism, for Tyre did not have independent rulers in Hellenistic times. 
Shakespeare did not use the name Apollonius. He was influenced, apparently, by a character in Arcadia, a romance written in 1580 by Sir Philip Sidney, which had as one of its heroes a character named Pyrocles. Pyrocles' nobility was something like that which Shakespeare had in mind for his own hero, and, perhaps for that reason, he used the name, converting it to the more common Greek form of Pericles. 
The only important historical Pericles was the leader of democratic Athens from 460 to 429 b.c. Under him, Athens was at the height of its power and culture and his rule may be taken as coinciding with the Golden Age of Greece. It must be emphasized, though, that the Pericles of Shakespeare's play has nothing whatever to do with Pericles of Golden Age Athens.


Ö this fair Hesperides




Pericles declares himself aware of the danger of wooing Antiochus' daughter, and she is brought out before him-a vision of loveliness. Antiochus says: 


Before thee stands this fair Hesperides,

With golden fruit, but dangerous to be touched;

For deathlike dragons here affright thee hard.





óAct I, scene i, lines 28-30 


This is a reference to the eleventh of the twelve labors which Hercules was supposed to undergo in the Greek myths. The Hesperides are so named from a Greek word meaning "west." They were the three daughters of Hesperus, the Evening Star (which always appears in the west after sunset), according to one version of the myth. Another version has them the daughters of the Titan Atlas, who gave his name to the Atlantic Ocean and who was associated with what was, to the Greeks, the Far West. 
On the far western section of the north African coast there was supposed to be a garden containing a tree bearing golden apples (oranges, I wonder?), which was guarded by an ever watchful dragon. Hercules achieved this task, as he did all others, but Antiochus seems to doubt that Pericles can do the equivalent. 


Ö to Tharsus




Antiochus presents the riddle Pericles must solve. It is a silly riddle and quite transparent. Pericles sees the answer at once and is horrified. He carefully hints at the truth and Antiochus is, in his turn, horrified. 
Pericles sees that to have solved the riddle is as dangerous as to have missed it and leaves hurriedly for Tyre. Antiochus sends a servant after the young prince to poison him. 
Even at Tyre, Pericles is uneasy. He is not far enough from Antioch and he feels that Antiochus will come against him with an army and bring misery on the whole city. (And well he might, for in actual history, Tyre became part of Antiochus' dominions in 198 b.c.) 
Pericles tells his loyal lord, Helicanus, the story and says he intends to go into exile: 


Tyre, I now look from thee then, and to

Tharsus Intend my travelÖ





óAct I, scene ii, lines 115-16 


No city named Tharsus is to be found in the gazetteers. 
The name is very similar to Tarsus, an important city on the southern coast of Asia Minor, best known to us as the place where Antony and Cleopatra first met (see page I-343) a century and a half after the time of Pericles, and where St. Paul was born a few decades later still. 
Tarsus, however, is only about 170 miles west of Antioch and was as firmly in the Seleucid grip as was Tyre itself. It is interesting to wonder if perhaps Tharsus is a distortion of Thasos, a small island in the northern Aegean Sea. There are places in the play where Thasos would fit well.- However, it is most likely that Tharsus is a completely fictitious place, no more to be located on the map than the Bohemia of The Winter's Tale (see page I-156). 


Ö the Trojan horse Ö




Pericles leaves Tyre just in time to escape Antiochus' poisoning emissary, but he finds matters in Tharsus not well. Its governor, Cleon, and his wife, Dionyza, bewail the fact that the prosperous city has been reduced by a two-year famine to a point of near cannibalism. Even as they are wailing, a fleet of ships appears on the horizon. At first they suspect it is an enemy come to take advantage of their weakness, but it is the noble Pericles. He enters with his attendants and says: 


Ö these our ships you happily [i.e., perhaps] may think

Are like the Trojan horse [which] was stuffed within

With bloody veins expecting overthrow,

Are stored with corn to make your needy bread,





óAct I, scene iv, lines 91-94 


The Trojan horse was the final stratagem of the Greeks, who after ten years' siege of Troy (see page I-89) had abandoned hope of conquest by direct attack. The climactic scene of the war is not described in Homer's Iliad or in Shakespeare's Troilus and Cressida. It is, however, described in Vergil's Aeneid. 
The Greeks built a giant hollow horse, filled it with their best warriors, then pretended to abandon the siege and sail away. The Trojans were easily convinced that the horse was an offering to Minerva (Athena) and that it was a good luck token which, if accepted, would forever protect the city against conquest. It was accordingly taken into the city and that night the Greek warriors emerged and opened the gates to the remainder of the army (which had secretly returned). Then began the bloody task of sacking the city. 
Pericles' ships, however, were not filled with warriors, but with food.


Ö our country of GreeceÖ




Gower emerges at the beginning of the Second Act to explain that Pericles is treated with great honor at Tharsus but that word comes to him from Tyre that Antiochus is indeed anxious to have him killed and that even Tharsus will not be safe. 
Pericles therefore takes to the sea again and this time is wrecked. He is washed on shore all alone, all his companions and goods gone. 
The Second Act opens, then, on the shore of the Pentapolis, which apparently is where Pericles has been washed up. He approaches some fishermen, asking their help for pity, pointing out that he has never had to beg before. The First Fisherman replies sardonically: 


No, friend, cannot you beg?

Here's them in our country of Greece

gets more with begging than we can do with working.





óAct II, scene i, lines 67-69 


The Pentapolis ("five cities") is a district on the north African shore about 550 miles west of Alexandria and 950 miles southwest of Antioch. The chief of the five cities was Cyrene, and the region is still called Cy-renaica today. It is the northeasternmost section of the modern nation of Libya and was much in the news in 1941 and 1942, when the British and Germans were fighting back and forth across it in the Desert War. 
Obviously, the Pentapolis is not in Greece in the modern sense, where that is specifically the land occupying the southernmost portion of the Balkan peninsula. Yet Shakespeare, or whoever wrote this scene, was (perhaps unknowingly) not really incorrect in the wider sense of Greece as including any area where Greek language and culture was dominant (see page I-172). 


A knight of Sparta. ..




The ruler of Pentapolis is Simonides, and his daughter, Thaisa, is having a birthday the next day. Various knights are to fight at a tournament in her honor (a queer intermingling of medieval custom with the ancient background). 
Pericles no sooner hears this than fishermen come in dragging a suit of armor which has entangled their nets in the sea. It is Pericles' own armor, lost in the shipwreck. Now he too can join the tournament and engage in a second type of contest for the beautiful daughter of a king. 
Simonides and Thaisa appear in the next scene, seated in a pavilion in the fashion of medieval sponsors of a tournament. The competing knights pass by, presenting their shields with the identifying device on each. 


Thaisa describes the first for her father:

A knight of Sparta, my renowned father;

And the device he bears upon his shield

Is a black Ethiop reaching at the sun.

The word, Lux tua vita mihi.





óAct II, scene ii, lines 18-21


Sparta was at one time the leading military city of Greece, but in 371 b.c., nearly two centuries before the apparent time of the play, it had been catastrophically defeated by Thebes at the Battle of Leuctra. From that time on, Sparta sat paralyzed, refusing to change with the times, and never admitted it was no longer the leader of Greece. In 200 b.c. it was in its last stages of independence and still produced good fighters. 
There is nothing impossible, then, in the appearance of a Spartan in the competition, although he could scarcely be a "knight" in the medieval sense. Nor is it at all likely that he would have a Latin motto ("Thy light is life to me") on his shield, since in the time of Antiochus the Great, Latin was, to the cultivated Greeks, a barbarous and uncouth native Italian dialect, nothing more. 


A prince of MacedonÖ




The second knight is described by Thaisa as: 


A prince of Macedon, my royal father;

And the device he bears upon his shield

Is an armed knight that's conquered by a lady;

The motto thus, in Spanish, Piu per dolcessa che per forza.





óAct II, scene ii, lines 24-27 


Macedon was a kingdom on the northwest shore of the Aegean Sea, Greek in language and culture, but backward in the time of Athens' Golden Age, and playing little part in Greek history at the time. 
It rose to prominence in 359 b.c. when a remarkable man, Philip II, began his period of rule over it. Under his guidance, it came to dominate Greece, and under his son, Alexander the Great, it conquered the Persian Empire. 
Macedon was greatly weakened by the conquest, in point of fact, as most of its soldiers and best citizens departed forever to rule over distant areas in Asia and Africa. It suffered also from barbarian invasions in the third century b.c. Nevertheless, Macedon managed to maintain control over the entire Balkan peninsula, including Greece proper. In 200 b.c., however, it stood at the brink of downfall, for war with Rome was beginning and this war Macedon was eventually to lose utterly.
It is not inappropriate that a Macedonian should be represented here, but what is he doing with a motto "in Spanish," a language which did not yet exist and would not for nearly a thousand years? (The Signet Shakespeare gives the motto in Italian, anyway, another language which did not yet exist. It means "More by gentleness than by force.") 


Ö a fire from heavenÖ




The third knight is from Antioch, the fourth and fifth are not identified geographically, and the sixth knight, in rusty, shabby armor, is Pericles. It is Pericles, of course, who wins the tournament, and Thaisa is much taken with his handsome appearance. There is a gala celebration and it looks as though Pericles' luck has turned. 
As for Antiochus, his luck has taken a final downturn. At Tyre, Heli-canus, who rules in Pericles' absence, tells what has happened. Apparently the gods are annoyed at Antiochus' incest and, as Helicanus says: 


Even in the height and pride of all his glory,

When he was seated in a chariot

Of an inestimable value, and

His daughter with him, a fire from heaven came,

And shriveled up their bodies, even to loathing.





óAct II, scene iv, lines 6-13 


In actual history, Antiochus the Great did not die such a death. His defeat by Rome placed a heavy burden on him in the way of tribute. He tried to raise the money by forcing the priesthood to disgorge the treasures hoarded in their temples. He was supervising the stripping of such a temple when the populace, aroused by the priests, mobbed and killed him in 187 b.c. 
A younger son of Antiochus III, Antiochus IV, ruled from 175 to 163 b.c., and he may well have contributed to the picture Shakespeare draws of "Antiochus the great." It was Antiochus IV who particularly beautified Antioch as the eastern provinces fell farther and farther away. It was Antiochus IV who made a name for himself in history as a king of intolerable wickedness, which also fits the picture in Pericles. 
Antiochus IV, like his father, was browbeaten by Rome (not even daring to meet them in battle) and, partly out of chagrin at that, turned against those Jews of his kingdom who would not accept Greek culture. The Jews rose in bloody revolt and the tale of that revolt is told in the Books of Maccabees, which form part of the Apocrypha but are accepted in the Catholic version of the Bible. 
Antiochus IV died of tuberculosis during a campaign in the eastern provinces. In the First Book of Maccabees (a sober historical account) his death is recounted undramatically, except that he is reported to have, in rather unlikely fashion, died regretting his actions against the Jews and recognizing that he was being punished for what he had done. 
In the Second Book of Maccabees (a more emotional account, and filled with tales of martyrdom and miracles) Antiochus is supposed to have died in agony, swarming with worms and rotting away while still alive: "and the filthiness of his smell was noisome to all his army. And the man, that thought a little afore he could reach to the stars of heaven, no man could endure to carry for his intolerable stink" (2 Maccabees 9:9-10). 
The death of Antiochus IV as reported in 2 Maccabees undoubtedly contributed to the death of Antiochus in Pericles, for Helicanus says that after Antiochus and his daughter had shriveled under the fire from heaven: 


Ö they so stunk

That all those eyes adored them ere their fall

Scorn now their hand should give them burial.





óAct II, scene iv, lines 11-13 


Ö make for Tharsus




Pericles' fortune continues to climb, for he marries Thaisa and then hears from Tyre that Antiochus is dead and that the Tyrians long for Pericles' return. 
He and his now pregnant wife, Thaisa, go on board ship to return to Tyre. Once again a storm strikes and at its height Thaisa goes into labor and is delivered of a baby girl. She apparently dies in the process and the superstitious sailors will not have a corpse on board. They place her in a coffin and shove it overboard. 
The battered ship is near Tharsus and Pericles feels they cannot make Tyre. He cries out: 


O make for Tharsus!

There will I visit Clean, for the babe

Cannot hold out to Tyrus.

There I'll leave it

At careful nursing





óAct III, scene i, lines 77-80 


To go from the Pentapolis to Tyre and be driven by the storm toward Tharsus is within belief if it is really Tarsus that the name implies; but it is much less credible if Tharsus is Thasos.


Ö through EphesusÖ




The scene now shifts to Ephesus and the home of Cerimon, a skillful doctor. A follower says to him: 


Your honor has throughEphesus poured forth

Your charity, and hundreds call themselves

Your creatures, who by you have been restored;





óAct III, scene ii, lines 43-45 


Ephesus, the great and prosperous city of the time of The Comedy of Errors, is still great and prosperous in the time of Pericles. 


This queen will liveÖ




At this moment, servants enter with a chest that has been cast up from the sea. It is the casket containing Thaisa, along with a note from Pericles asking that if the dead body be found, it be piously buried. 
But Cerimon is a skillful physician indeed. He says: 


This queen will live: nature awakes; a warmth

Breathes out of her. She hath not been entranced

Above five hours.





óAct III, scene ii, lines 94-96 


If Tharsus were really Tarsus, this would be impossible. The Queen's body was consigned to the sea at a time when the ship was near Tharsus and to reach Ephesus would require it to drift westward the length of Asia Minor and then northward, half the length of the Aegean coast of that peninsula-an about six-hundred-mile journey. To drift at 120 miles an hour is quite a picture. 
On the other hand, suppose the storm had driven the ship to Thasos. From there to Ephesus would be only 250 miles, which would require a drift of 50 miles an hour. 
But at Tharsus, Pericles asks when Tyre can be reached and a sailor says: 


By break of day, if the wind cease.





óAct HI, scene i, line 76 


From Thasos to Tyre is more than a night's journey. So it's best to ignore geography. Tharsus cannot be placed anywhere on the map in such a way as to have a plausible relationship to Ephesus, Tyre, and Pentapolis, all three of which have positions that are known and fixed. 


And Aesculapius. ..




To restore Thaisa to life is, of course, an arduous task even for Cerimon, who ends by saying: 


And Aesculapius guide us!





óAct III, scene ii, line 112 


Aesculapius (the Latin version of the Greek Asclepius) was, in Greek myth, a son of Apollo who was supremely skilled as a physician. So skillful was he that he could restore life to the dead. This enraged Hades, who apparently felt himself to be endangered by technological unemployment. He complained to Jupiter (Zeus), who solved matters by killing Aesculapius with a thunderbolt. After death, Aesculapius was raised to divine rank and became the god of medicine. 
It is in his divine role that Cerimon appeals to him on this occasion. 


Marina.. .




At Tharsus Pericles is greeted warmly as the savior of the tune of the famine, but he cannot linger. He must go to Tyre, leaving behind: 


My gentle babe,

Marina, who,

for she was born at sea,

I have named so.. .





óAct III, scene iii, lines 12-16 


"Marina" is the feminine form of the Latin word meaning "of the sea." The baby is left in the care of Cleon and his wife Dionyza. 


Diana's temple Ö




In Ephesus Thaisa is now fully recovered and, thinking that Pericles died in the shipwreck, says she will live in religious retreat. Cerimon, the doctor, says: 


Madam, if this you purpose as ye speak,

Diana's temple is not distant far,

Where you may abideÖ





óAct III, scene iv, lines 11-13


Ephesus in ancient times was known for its temple to Diana (Artemis). An early version of this temple was completed about 420 b.c. and was impressive enough to be considered one of the Seven Wonders of the World. 
In October 356 b.c. the temple was destroyed by fire and it proved to be a case of deliberate arson. When the culprit was captured, he was asked why he had done this deed. He replied that he did it in order that his name might live forever in history. He was executed and to defeat his desire it was ordered that his name be erased from all records and never be spoken. (However, the man had his wish after all, for a name purporting to be his survives somehow. It is Herostratus.) 
This was a century and a half before the time of Pericles, but the temple was rebuilt, of course. Indeed, it is most famous to moderns because it plays a distant role in the New Testament, some two centuries after the time of Pericles and four centuries after Herostratus' crime. 
St. Paul, in Ephesus on a missionary voyage, denounced idolatry and roused the hostility of the silversmiths of the city, who did a roaring business in the manufacture of little religious objects for tourists who came to visit the temple of Diana. Not foreseeing the time when their successors would do equally well, if not better, with small crucifixes and statues of the Virgin Mary, the silversmiths were horrified at St. Paul's denunciation of idolatry. There were riots in the city and the crowd was "full of wrath and cried out, saying, Great is Diana of the Ephesians" (Acts of the Apostles 19:28). 
To be sure, Shakespeare knew Diana as the virgin goddess of the moon and the hunt (see page I-14), as she was in classical Greek mythology. The Diana of the Ephesians was another goddess altogether, a representation of fecundity, a fertility goddess with her chest covered by breasts, representing, perhaps, the nourishing earth. Diana's temple in Ephesus was surely not an appropriate life for a quiet existence, free from the sexual lusts of the world, but in the play it is taken as such. 


Ö dove of Paphos. ..




The fourth act once again opens with Gower, who covers this time a passage of fourteen years, during which Marina grows to young womanhood in Tharsus. (The actual length of the time is specified later, when Pericles refers to her as fourteen years old.) 
This is very similar to The Winter's Tale, where another baby girl, Perdita, separated from her parents, also grows to young womanhood (see page I-158). In both cases the father of the young girl is a ruler and the mother is thought to be dead but isn't really. 
One difference in the two plays is that Perdita grows up in The Winter's Tale to know only love and admiration, while Marina in Pericles is not so lucky. 
Cleon and Dionyza have a daughter of their own named Philoten, who is completely overshadowed by Marina. Gower describes the hopelessness of Philoten's case: 


Ö so

With dove of Paphos might the crow

Vie feathers white.





óAct IV, Introduction, lines 31-33 


The dove of Paphos (see page I-15) is one of those doves that draw Venus' chariot. 


Ö rob TellusÖ




Dionyza plots, out of jealousy, to have Marina murdered despite the great debt owed Pericles by Tharsus. Her vile plan is made the easier since Marina's nurse, who has been with her since her birth, has just died and Marina has lost a natural guardian. Indeed, Marina makes her first appearance in the play mourning her nurse's death. She is carrying a basket of flowers and speaks sadly at the grave of the dead woman: 


No, I will rob Tellus of her weed

To strew thy green with flowersÖ





óAct IV, scene i, lines 13-14 


Tellus is one of the names of the Roman goddess of the earth, Terra being the other, and more familiar, one. 


Ö Mytilene is full.. .




Dionyza urges Marina to take a walk on the seashore with a man who has been ordered to murder her. Providentially, a band of pirates come ashore and seize Marina before she can be killed. 
Marina's situation has not improved by much, however, for the scene shifts to a brothel in Mytilene where the pander in charge is having problems. He says to his men: 


Search the market narrowly!

Mytilene is full of gallants.

We lost too much money

this mart by being too wenchless.





óAct IV, scene ii, lines 3-5


Mytilene is the chief city on the island of Lesbos in the eastern Aegean. It is one of the larger Aegean islands and of the other places mentioned in the play it is nearest to Ephesus. It is only about a hundred miles northwest of Ephesus in a direct line, though the sea voyage would require working round a promontory of land and would be longer. 
It is, on the other hand, 150 miles southeast of Thasos and, if that island were "Tharsus," it would be easy to imagine the pirates making for Mytilene, which, as a sailors' haven, is apparently a good market for prostitution. 


The poor Transylvanian.. .




In rather revolting terms, the pander and a bawd continue to talk about the shortage of girls. The pander says: 


The poor Transylvanian is dead

that lay with the little baggage.





óAct IV, scene ii, lines 22-23 


This is an indication that the few girls they have are riddled with disease. Of course, the use of the term "Transylvanian" is an anachronism. Transylvania is a region which now makes up the central portion of modern Romania, or, as it was known to the Romans, Dacia. The term "Transylvania" did not come into use until the twelfth century. It means "beyond the forests" and was first used by the Hungarians, from whose standpoint Transylvania was indeed a land beyond the forests. 
It is to Mytilene that the pirates have brought Marina, and they sell her, still untouched (virgins bring high prices) to the brothel. 


The petty wrens of TharsusÖ




At Tharsus Cleon is horrified at what Dionyza has done. She faces it out, however, and maintains that Pericles need never know. She wants to know if Cleon is: 


Ö one of those that thinks

The petty wrens of Tharsus will fly hence

And open this to Pericles.





óAct IV, scene iii, lines 21-23 


This is in line with the old superstition that birds will tell of crimes, from which comes our own phrase "a little bird told me."
One possible source of the idea rests in a popular Greek tale concerning a poet, Ibycus, en route to Corinth, who was set upon by thieves and killed. As he was dying, he cried out to cranes passing overhead, urging them to tell the world of the crime. 
The Corinthian populace was stunned and horrified at the death of the popular poet and the thieves were uneasy at the stir they had created. During the course of a play which they were watching along with the rest of the Corinthians, the Furies (spirits who avenge crimes) were presented in such horrid fashion that the thieves were terrified. And when, just at this moment, cranes happened to fly overhead, the distraught thieves cried, "The cranes of Ibycus! The cranes of Ibycus!" and gave themselves away. 
Another possible source for the superstition rests in a verse in the Bible which says: "Curse not the king, no not in thy thought; and curse not the rich in thy bedchamber: for a bird of the air shall carry the voice, and that which hath wings shall tell the matter" (Ecclesiastes 10:20). This can be interpreted as a warning that Icings and powerful men have spies and sycophants in plenty who are always ready to earn gratitude by accusing others of treasons. However, there is a temptation to take anything in the Bible literally and the notion of telltale birds entered the language. 


Thetis, being proud.. .




It seems that Pericles' miseries are never done. Gower emerges yet again in the next scene to describe how Pericles comes to Tharsus to get his daughter (why the long delay?) and finds her dead, with a monument built to her in the market place; on which is an inscription that reads in part: 


Ö at her birth Thetis, being proud,

swallowed some part o'th'earth





óAct IV, scene iv, lines 38-39 


Thetis was a sea nymph whom Shakespeare here, as elsewhere (see page I-91), confuses with Tethys, a goddess of the sea. 


Ö the god Priapus Ö




Meanwhile, the brothel at Mytilene is the scene of a new kind of trouble. Marina has been installed as one of the prostitutes, but she remains untouched. Those who approach her are quickly converted to virtue and leave with the determination to patronize brothels no more. The bawd is horrified, saying: 


Fie, fie upon her!

She's able to freeze the god PriapusÖ





óAct IV, scene vi, lines 3-4 


Priapus is a god of fertility, pictured as a dwarfish, ugly creature with a gigantic penis in a perpetual state of erection (whence our own medical term "priapism"). 
When Lysimachus, the governor of Mytilene, comes to the house, Marina quickly converts him too and sends him away virtuous. In despair, the pander and bawd hand Marina over to a servant to be deflowered, thinking that then she might become more amenable to their purposes. Marina, however, persuades him to make an effort to hire her out as a governess instead, capable of teaching many maidenly accomplishments. 


The music of the spheres Ö




Pericles' ship, returning from Tharsus to Tyre, passes by Mytilene. (If Tharsus is Tarsus, this is impossible. If Tharsus is Thasos, it is quite possible.) 
The governor of Mytilene, Lysimachus, boards the ship and finds Pericles sitting there, speechless with grief. He is saddened by the sight and says that there is a girl in Mytilene who can console him. Marina is brought on board and, before long, it turns out that the two are father and daughter. 
At the discovery, Pericles hears music the others cannot. He says: 


The music of the spheres! List, my Marina.





óAct V, scene i, line 232 


This is a reference to a mystical Greek notion. The philosopher Pythagoras of Samos discovered that twanging cords with lengths related to each other by small whole numbers emitted harmonious notes. It set him to thinking of the importance of numbers in the universe and he and his disciples evolved many odd beliefs based on numbers. 
The Pythagoreans later developed the notion of the individual planets being set in spheres (see page I-25) at distances relative to each other such that they could emit harmonious notes. Perhaps at first this "music of the spheres" was considered metaphorically only, but eventually it was taken literally and came to mean a celestial sound that was far more beautiful than could be imagined on earth. 
Pericles was finally being rewarded for having endured so much misfortune so patiently.


Ö goddess argentine




At the sound of the music, Pericles falls asleep and in his sleep the goddess Diana appears to him. Pericles is ordered to go to the Ephesian temple, there to make known his story to the people. He wakes and says: 


Celestial Dian, goddess argentine,

I will obey thee.. .





óAct V, scene i, lines 252-53 


Diana (Artemis) is goddess of the moon, which is silver, rather than the sun's bright gold. The Latin word for silver is argentum, so that Diana as the silver goddess of the moon is the "goddess argentine." 
The nation of Argentina was so named because the earliest explorers found the natives wearing silver ornaments. The river which they were exploring became the Rio de la Plata (Spanish for "Silver River"). The nation that grew up about that river as a nucleus became the Latinized version of the same idea, Argentina. 
As a result, the term "goddess argentine" would nowadays be rather ambiguous. 
In Ephesus Pericles discovers his wife Thaisa and so, after fourteen years, the family is reunited. It is left to Gower to explain that Marina will be married to Lysimachus and that Pericles visited vengeance on Cleon and Dionyza by returning to Tharsus and burning them in their palace. 










Part II. Roman






9. The Rape Of Lucrece





Shakespeare wrote four plays and one narrative poem dealing with Roman history, real, legendary, or fictional. Of these, it is the poem, The Rape of Lucrece, that deals with the earliest event, the legendary fall of the Roman monarchy in 509 b.c. 
If I were treating all Shakespeare's works in a single chronological grouping, The Rape of Lucrece would be placed between Troilus and Cressida and Timon of Athens. However, since I am segregating the Greek and Roman works, The Rape of Lucrece appears as the first of the Roman group. 


The loveÖ




The Rape of Lucrece was published about May 1594, a year after Venus and Adonis. This later poem is both longer and more serious than the earlier, and makes for harder reading too. Like the earlier poem, it is dedicated to Southampton (see page I-3), and the additional year seems to have increased the intimacy between Shakespeare and his young patron. At least the dedication begins: 


The love I dedicate to your Lordship is without end;





óDedication 


Lust-breathed TarquinÖ




The first stanza of the poem plunges the story into action at once: 


From the besieged Ardea all in post,

Borne by the trustless wings of false desire,

Lust-breathed Tarquin leaves the Roman host





ólines 1-3 


The year, according to legend, is 509 b.c., and Rome is still no more than a city-state. It had been founded about two and a half centuries before (753 b.c. is the traditional date) and has been governed by a line of kings. Ruling in the city now is the seventh king to sit on the Roman throne. His name is Lucius Tarquinius (better known in English as Tarquin) and he has been given the surname Superbus, meaning "proud," because of his arrogant tyranny. 
Tarquin forced the senatorial aristocracy into submission by executing some on trumped-up charges and by refusing to replace those who died a natural death. 
He kept himself in power by gathering an armed guard about himself, and ruled as a military despot. Nevertheless, he maintained a kind of popularity with the common people by a program of public works and by an aggressive foreign policy that brought in loot from surrounding tribes. 
The aristocracy could only wait and hope that some particular event would take place to alienate the populace generally from the despotic monarch. 
It is not, however, King Tarquin who is referred to in the third line of the poem, but his son, Tarquinius Sextus, the heir to the throne. 
The Roman army is engaged in a war against the Volscians, a tribe who occupied territory just south of Rome. The Romans were at this time laying siege to Ardea, one of the Volscian cities, just twenty miles south of Rome, and it is from this siege that Tarquin Sextus is hurrying. 


Ö Lucrece the chaste




The incident Shakespeare is about to relate is to be found in the first book of the History of Rome by Titus Livius (better known as Livy to English-speaking people), and also in the Fasti (Annals), written by Shakespeare's favorite ancient writer, Ovid. 
Despite the fact that the incident is taken from ancient writers, it is not at all likely that it is historically accurate. In 390 b.c., a little over a century after the time of Tarquin, Rome was taken and sacked by the barbarian Gauls and the historical records were destroyed. All of Roman history prior to 390 b.c. is a mass of legends based on uncertain kernels of fact. 
The legends narrated by Livy and others were, however, accepted as sober fact right down to modern times, and certainly Shakespeare accepted this tale as such. He goes on for the remainder of the first verse to tell the reason for the prince's haste: 


And to Collatiun bears the lightless fire

Which, in pale embers hid, lurks to aspire

And girdle with embracing flames the waist

Of Collatine's fair love, Lucrece the chaste.





ólines 4-6 


Prince Tarquin has a cousin, also named Tarquin, whose estates are near Collatia (which Shakespeare calls "Collatium"), a small town ten miles east of Rome. He was therefore Tarquin of Collatia, or in Latin: Tarquinius Collatinus. In order to distinguish him from Tarquinius Superbus, the King, and from Tarquinius Sextus, the prince, he may be called simply Collatinus, or, in English, Collatine. 
At the siege of Ardea (and a siege is usually a boring occupation) the Roman aristocrats, it seems, fell to discussing their wives, each boasting of the virtue and chastity of his own. This is the sort of thing one would scarcely think men would seriously do, yet it is common in romances. Shakespeare uses such a discussion as the mainspring of part of the action in Cymbeline (see page II-58), for instance. 
In fact, the unreal romanticism of this discussion is part of what causes historians to suspect the account of the Rape of Lucrece to be a fable. It is very likely a tale made up long after Tarquin's reign to account for the establishment of the Republic; a historical romance, to begin with, later taken as sober history. 
But, history or fiction, this is the tale. Of the Roman aristocrats, Collatine was most emphatic in maintaining the chastity and sobriety of his wife, Lucretia, a name of which Lucrece is a shortened version. 
It came down to a wager eventually, and the Romans decided to leave the siege temporarily so that they might dash home to Rome to check on their wives' activities. Doing so, they found that all the wives but Lucrece were having a good time; dancing, laughing, gossiping, feasting. Lucrece, however, was at home, alone except for her maids, and was gravely engaged in the housewifely task of spuming. 
Collatine had won his wager, but in a deeper sense, he had lost, for Prince Tarquin, having seen Lucrece's beauty and chastity, conceived a powerful desire to make love to her. Once all the aristocrats were back at the siege, he left again, this time alone, in order to gratify that desire. 


Ö had Narcissus seen her Ö




Tarquin is not at ease. He is not an utterly abandoned villain and he feels the guilt and disgrace of the reprehensible thing he is doing-yet he cannot help himself. After having arrived, he is treated as a welcome guest and Lucrece asks for news of her husband. Tarquin muses on her beauty and says to himself that, on hearing her husband was well 


Ö she smiled with so sweet a cheer

That, had Narcissus seen her as she stood,

Self-love had never drown'd him in the flood.





ólines 264-66


Narcissus is the young man in Greek myths who loved only himself, and drowned trying to kiss his reflection in water (see page I-10). 


Ö a cockatrice' dead-killing eye




When night comes, Prince Tarquin invades Lucrece's bedroom and tells her that if she will not yield, he will take her anyway and kill a slave, whom he will accuse as her lover. The situation paralyzes Lucrece with horror, which the poem indicates by stating: 


Here with a cockatrice' dead-killing eye

He rouseth up himself and makes a pause;





ólines 540-4l 


Tarquin's words have the effect on her that a cockatrice's eye would have. The legendary cockatrice, the infinitely poisonous snake, kills with a mere glance (see page I-150). 
A similar metaphor from the other direction is then used: 


So his unhallowed haste her words delays,

And moody Pluto winks while Orpheus plays.





ólines 552-53 


The reference is to Orpheus' descent into the underworld to win back his wife Eurydice (see page I-47). His music charmed even Pluto, and as the harsh king of the underworld was made captive by beauty, so chaste Lucrece was paralyzed by evil. 


Ö still-pining Tantalus. ..




Tarquin rapes Lucrece, then hastens away, miserable and guilty, leaving her behind, miserable and innocent. 
To Lucrece, all the world is now fit only for cursing. There is no comfort anywhere or in anything. What good is wealth, for instance? The aged miser, having accumulated his hoard, finds his health gone, and cannot buy youth back with his gold: 


But like still-pining Tantalus he sits

And useless barns the harvest of his wits,





ólines 858-59 


Tantalus is always the very personification of punishment through frustration (see page I-13).


Ö Fortune's wheel




Nor does time heal matters in her now utterly pessimistic view. It but makes matters worse; merely serving to 


Ö turn the giddy round of Fortune's wheel.





óline 952 


Fortune (Tyche), an important goddess to the later Greeks (see page I-135), was often pictured with a turning wheel. That represented the manner in which men's fortunes rose and fell in indifferent alternation. 


Ö lamenting Philomele. ..




One thing she determines. She will tell her husband the truth, so that he might not imagine his desecrated wife to be whole, and so that Tarquin might not be able to smile secretly at Collatine's ignorance. This conclusion brings her solace and she ends her wailing for a while: 


By this, lamenting Philomele had ended

This well-tun'd warble of her nightly sorrow,





ólines 1079-80 


Philomela was a young woman in the Greek myths who (in Ovid's version of the tale) had undergone an even crueler rape than that of Lucrece, and who was eventually turned into a nightingale which nightly sang the sad song of her misery. Philomela is therefore a poetic synonym for "nightingale" and is frequently used in this way by Shakespeare. 
Indeed, Shakespeare used this particular myth in detail in Titus Andronicus (see page I-405), which was written shortly before The Rape of Lucrece. 
The rapist in Philomela's case was a Thracian king named Tereus, and Lucrece sees the comparison, for she says to the nightingale she imagines before her: 


For burthen-wise I'll hum on Tarquin still,

While thou on Tereus descants better skill;





ólines 1133-34 


She then makes use of the legend of the nightingale leaning against a thorn to keep awake all night (see page I-64) to hint at suicide:


Ö wretched I







To imitate thee well, against my heart

Will fix a sharp knifeÖ





ólines 1136-38 


Ö Pyrrhus' proud footÖ




She will not kill herself, however, until Collatine finds out the truth, and she writes a letter, begging him to hasten home. While she waits she has a chance to study and comment on an elaborate painting of the Greek siege of Troy, which had taken place seven centuries before her time. 
(Actually in 509 b.c. Rome was completely under Etruscan cultural influence and was far removed from the world of Greek art and literature. It is extremely unlikely that the real Lucrece would be so knowledgeable of Greek mythology or have an opportunity to study paintings of the Trojan War. However, Shakespeare's high-flown style in this poem made such abundant classical allusion necessary.) 
The painting is described. It is 


Ö made for Priam's Troy

Before the which is drawn the power of Greece,

For Helen's rape the city to destroy,




ólines 1367-69 


The Trojan War had had its cause, according to legend, in the rape (i.e., abduction) of Helen by Paris (see page I-76), and there is, therefore, an analogy to Lucrece's situation. 
The individual Greek heroes are mentioned: 


In Ajax' eyes blunt rage and rigour roll'd;

But the mild glance that sly Ulysses lent

Show'd deep regard and smiling government.

There pleading might you see grave

Nestor stand, As 'twere encouraging the

Greeks to fight,




ólines 1398-1402 


Ajax was, next to Achilles, the strongest of the Greeks; Ulysses (Odysseus) the craftiest; Nestor the wisest. All play important parts in Troilus and Cressida (see pages I-86, I-91, and I-92) and their listing here symbolizes Troy being assailed by strength, cunning, and wisdom. 
Beyond that, Troy is confronted also by irresistible fate, as epitomized by the transcendent hero Achilles:


Ö for Achilles' image stood his spear,

Grip'd in an armed hand; himself behind

Was left unseen. ..




ólines 1424-26 


The spear was symbol enough; the obscured hero was more an impersonal and relentless force than a man. He too plays his part, in an all-too-human fashion, in Troilus and Cressida (see page I-114). 
What's more, the picture shows the Trojan War in its various stages. At another place, Lucrece sees Troy fallen and finds in it a face with sorrows to match her own: 


Ö she despairing Hecuba beheld,

Staring on Priam's wounds with her old eyes,

Which bleeding under Pyrrhus' proud foot lies.





ólines 1447-49 


This incident is past the ending of Homer's Iliad and of Shakespeare's Troilus and Cressida. It represents the tendencies of the later mythmakers to pile horror on horror and to multiply the tragedy of Troy's final destruction. 
The Trojan King, Priam (see page I-79), had witnessed his city besieged for ten years and, one by one, nearly every one of his fifty sons killed. Now at last the Greeks were gone, but they had left behind a large wooden horse (see page I-188). Priam and the Trojans are persuaded to drag the horse into the city and the Greek warriors hidden within emerge at night, open the gates for the remainder of the army, and begin their slaughter. 
Priam and his aged wife, Hecuba (see page I-85), flee to an altar of Zeus where they might be safe. Polites, one of Priam's very few surviving sons, comes running madly toward the altar too. Behind him is Pyrrhus (or Neoptolemus) (see page I-115), the son of Achilles. 
Pyrrhus has been brought to the field of Troy after his father has been killed by an arrow in the heel from the bow of Paris. He quickly proves himself as brave and as cruel as his father. 
Now it is his cruelty that is predominant. He kills Polites even at the altar and in the presence of his parents. Priam, driven mad at the sight, feebly casts a spear at Pyrrhus, who promptly kills him as well. 


Ö perjur'd Sinon...




Lucrece sadly views the depicted miseries of falling Troy:


Lo, here weeps Hecuba, here Priam dies,

Here manly Hector faints, here Troilus sounds [swoons]




ólines 1485-86 


Hector was the greatest of the Trojan warriors (see page I-188), but in the medieval versions of the story of Troy, it is his younger brother, Troilus, who rises to prominence, and it is Troilus who is the titular hero of Troilus and Cressida. 
Lucrece finally concentrates, however, on a Greek captive, taken by the Trojans after the Greeks had built their wooden horse. This captive, Sinon, who pretended to be a refugee from the Greeks, told a false story that the wooden horse was an offering to Athena and would forever protect Troy from conquest if brought within the city. He is therefore described as: 


Ö perjur'd Sinon, whose enchanting story

The credulous old Priam after slew;





ólines 1521-22 


The story which Priam believed brought about the death of the old king. It is to Sinon, the very symbol of treachery in aftertime, that Lucrece compares Tarquin. 


Ö Brutus drew




Finally Collatine arrives home from the siege, anxious to know what emergency had caused his wife to write. With him are other men of senatorial rank. To them all, Lucrece tells the story, and while they stand there horrified, she draws her knife and kills herself. 
For a moment, all stand transfixed. Lucretius, her father, throws himself in sorrow on her body: 


And from the purple fountain Brutus drew

The murd'rous knife...





ólines 1734-35 


This is the first mention of Lucius Junius Brutus, an aristocrat who had escaped the deadly attentions of King Tarquin by pretending to be a moron and therefore harmless. ("Brutus" means "stupid," and this name was, supposedly, given to him because of his successful play acting. However, the truth may be the reverse. It may have been known that one of the destroyers of the Tarquinian kingdom was named Brutus and for lack of other hard details after the Gallic sack in 390 b.c., the meaning of the name was allowed to inspire the tale of his pretending to be a moron.) 
Brutus had good reason to play it safe in any way he could, for according to the legend, his father and older brother had been among those executed by Tarquin-something which did not cause him to love the king either. 
Now, seeing the shock, horror, and hatred sweeping the spectators, Brutus feels that he will be able to head a popular movement against the kingdom. He no longer needs his pretense of stupidity: 


Brutus, who pluck'd the knife from Lucrece' side,

Seeing such emulation in their woe,

Began to clothe his wit in state and pride,

Burying in Lucrece' wound his folly's show.





ólines 1807-10 


Brutus rouses the crowd and the poem ends with a final (and 265th) verse: 


They did conclude to bear dead Lucrece thence,

To show her bleeding body thorough Rome,

And so to publish Tarquin's foul offence;

Which being done with speedy diligence,

The Romans plausibly [with applause] did give consent

To Tarquin's everlasting banishment.





ólines 1850-55 


Thus did the Roman kingdom come to an end. In its place was established the Roman Republic, which five centuries later was to rule all the Mediterranean world. 








10. The Tragedy of Coriolanus


Oe of the most popular of the ancient historians was Plutarch, a Greek who was born in Chaeronea, a town about sixty miles northwest of Athens, in a.d. 46. In his time, Greece had long passed the days of its military splendor and was utterly dominated by Rome, then at the very height of its empire. 
Anxious to remind the Romans (and Greeks too) of what the Greeks had once been, Plutarch wrote a series of short biographies about a.d. 100 in which he dealt with men in pairs, one Greek and one Roman, the two being compared and contrasted. Thus, Theseus (see page I-18), the legendary unifier of the Attic peninsula under Athens, was paired with Romulus, the legendary founder of Rome. For this reason, the book is commonly called The Parallel Lives. Plutarch's style is so pleasing that his book, with its gossipy stories about great historical figures, has remained popular ever since. 
It was put into English in 1579 (from a French version) by Sir Thomas North, who did it so well that his book turned out to be one of the prose masterpieces of the Elizabethan Age. Shakespeare read it and used it as the basis for three of his plays. He paid the translation the ultimate compliment of scarcely changing its words in some cases. They made almost perfect blank verse as they stood. 
Shakespeare wrote Coriolanus about 1608 and it was the last of his three Plutarchian plays. Its subject matter was, however, the earliest in time, so I am placing it first. 
The action opens in 494 b.c. (according to legend), only fifteen years after the rape of Lucrece, the expulsion of the Tarquins, and the establishment of the Republic by Brutus (see page I-211). The events described in the play are therefore of extremely dubious value historically, for they take place a century before the destruction of the Roman annals by the Gallic invaders (see page I-204). 
Nevertheless, with Plutarch's guidance, Shakespeare can draw upon a complete and interesting story, though perhaps one that is too romantic to sound completely true.


Ö to die than to famish




Coriolanus opens in the streets of Rome, with citizens hurrying onstage in a fever of agitation, carrying weapons. Some crisis is taking place and the men are desperate. Their leader is called "First Citizen" in the play and he calls out to them: 


You are all resolved

rather to die than to famish?





óAct I, scene i, lines 4-5 


Only fifteen years before, King Tarquin had been driven out of Rome and the institution of the monarchy had been destroyed. The Roman Republic was set up and was to last for five centuries. Control was placed in the hands of the aristocracy (the "patricians"), with numerous checks and balances, to make sure that no one of the aristocrats could gain so much power as to make himself a king and start the round of tyranny and revolt over again. 
That did not mean, however, that Rome had become a little corner of heaven. The patricians, now that they had power in their hands, intended to keep it there. They reserved to themselves virtually all the rights, both political and economic, and yielded very little to the common people ("plebeians"). 
The plebeians in those days were small farmers who were expected to leave their farms and fight the city's battles whenever duty called. In the years after the first founding of the Republic, duty called frequently, for the exiled king tried to regain his position and made use of neighboring tribes as allies. Rome had to fight for its life. 
As a result of those wars, though, the plebeian soldier might return from battle to find his farm neglected, or even ravaged, and would be in need of capital to begin again. The city did not consider itself economically responsible for its farmers and the loans a plebeian could get from the patricians were on harsh terms; and if they were not repaid, he and his family could be sold into slavery. 
Furthermore, when food was scarce there was nothing to prevent the patricians (who had the capital for it) from buying up the supplies and then reselling it to the plebeians at a profit, thus capitalizing on the general misfortune. 
It would be utterly inhuman to expect that the plebeians would sit still for all this. Undoubtedly, their lot had worsened under the Republic and they found it intolerable that they were expected to give their lives for the patricians while getting nothing in return.
The riotous citizens onstage are rebelling plebeians, then, and the First Citizen reminds them whom they are chiefly to blame for their misfortunes. He cries out: 


First you know, Caius Marcius

is chief enemy to the people.





óAct I, scene i, lines 7-8 


Caius Marcius is the proper name of the hero of the play. He is to gain the surname of Coriolanus under circumstances to be described later. 
Caius Marcius came from an old patrician family. According to Plutarch (in a passage Shakespeare quotes later in the play) he was a descendant of Ancus Marcius, the fourth king of Rome. This did not mean that Caius Marcius, as the descendant of a king, was necessarily a royalist. 
Rome's seven kings could be divided into two groups, in fact, with Ancus Marcius belonging to the older. When he became king, he established an advisory body consisting of a hundred of the older representatives of the various clans that made up the city's people. This group of older men was the "Senate," so called from the Latin word for "old men." These senators were called "patricians" from the Latin word for "father," because they were, in theory, the fathers of the people. The word was then extended to all the old families from whom senators might be drawn. 
According to tradition, Ancus Marcius brought in new colonists from among conquered tribes outside Rome, since the growing city could use the extra hands. These, however, were not granted the political powers of the old Romans. It was their descendants who became plebeians. 
Ancus Marcius was not succeeded by his sons, but by a king called Tarquinius Priscus ("Tarquin the Elder"), who was an Etruscan from the north. (The Etruscans to the north of Rome were at that time the dominant people in Italy, and the succession of Tarquinius Priscus may be actually a sign of Etruscan overlordship of Rome-a situation softened in the Roman legends out of Roman pride.) 
Under Tarquinius Priscus, Rome prospered materially, but the power of the king increased at the expense of the patricians. He was finally assassinated by those on the side of the old kings, but eventually the son of Tarquinius Priscus gained the throne. This was the Tarquinius Superbus who was expelled from Rome after the events outlined in The Rape of Lucrece (see page I-211). 
Caius Marcius, by family tradition, then, would be against the Tarquinian notion of monarchy. And he would be strongly pro-patrician and anti-plebeian.


Ö dog to the commonalty




When the Second Citizen, a less extreme leader of the plebeian mob, expresses reservations against aiming at Marcius particularly, the First Citizen replies firmly: 


Against him first:

he's a very dog to the commonalty.





óAct I, scene i, lines 28-29 


This is the key to Marcius' character. He is a "dog" to his enemies. He snarls and bites. Plutarch says of him: "he was so choleric and impatient, that he would yield to no living creature, which made him churlish, uncivil, and altogether unfit for any man's conversation." 
That is his tragedy: the tragedy of his personality. What he might have gained, and ought to have gamed for the better qualities within himself, he threw away by his perpetual anger and willfulness. 
It may have been just this which was the challenge that interested Shakespeare and made him decide to write the play. In Antony and Cleopatra (see page I-317), which he had written a year or so earlier, Shakespeare shows us a flawed hero, Mark Antony, who sacrificed honor and worldly ambition to love and to sexual passion. In Coriolanus he shows us the reverse, a hero who served only military honor and who allowed nothing to stand in his way (with one exception). 
Yet although Antony is loaded to the breaking point with weaknesses, while Marcius is stuffed to the bursting point with virtues, we end by loving Antony and feeling a cold dislike for Coriolanus. Surely Shakespeare is far too good a playwright to have done this by accident. Might not Coriolanus be viewed as a frigid satire of the military virtues; as an example of Shakespeare's distaste for war, a distaste that shows through even the official idolatry of the English hero-king in Henry V (see page II-481)? 


Ö to please his mother.. .




When the Second Citizen urges in Marcius' defense that he has served his country well, the First Citizen admits that much but insists it was not done for Rome. He says: 


Ö though soft-conscienced men can be content

to say it was for his country,

he did it to please his motherÖ





óAct I, scene i, lines 37-39 


There is Marcius' one weakness. He loves his mother. And even that weakness is, looked at superficially, another piece of nobility. Why should not a man love his mother? Certainly the United States of today, with its Mother's Day and its semiofficial matriolatry, is no society in which to argue that to love one's mother is wrong, or even a weakness. 
Yet it is made plain as the play progresses that the love-of-mother in Coriolanus' case is extreme. It is the clearest case of an Oedipal fixation in Shakespeare, far clearer than in the dubious case of Hamlet. 
According to the legend, Marcius' father died while he was very young and the boy was then brought up by his mother. The rearing was successful in establishing a close relationship between them. Here are Plutarch's words: "Ö touching Marcius, the only thing that made him to love honor was the joy he saw his mother did take of him. For he thought nothing made him so happy and honorable, as that his mother might hear everybody praise and commend him, that she might always see him return with a crown upon his head, and that she might still embrace him with tears running down her cheeks for joy." 
This sort of thing, we can see, is not calculated to endear him to Rome generally. Those plebeians who got only the rough side of Marcius' tongue and the harsh side of his advice on policy might not feel any necessity to be grateful for something he did only to please his mother. Let his mother reward him, not the people, and this is what the First Citizen seems to be implying. 
Furthermore, Marcius' attitude as described by Plutarch and as adopted by Shakespeare is that of a boy, not a man. Marcius is a boy who never grew up, except physically. Emotionally he remains a boy, not only with respect to his mother but with respect to everything else. If we are to understand the play, this point must not be forgotten. 


Ö To th'Capitol




While the citizens talk, there are shouts from offstage which seem to signify the revolt is spreading. The First Citizen cries out impatiently: 


Why slay we prating here?

To th'Capitol!





óAct I, scene i, lines 48-49 


The city of Rome eventually spread out over seven hills. One of the earliest to be occupied was the Capitoline Hill. This had steep sides in some directions, which made it suitable for defense. A large temple to Jupiter was built upon it which could also serve as a last-ditch fortress. 
The name of the hill is from a Latin word meaning "head," and the legend arose that a head or skull was uncovered when the foundations of the temple were being dug. The Senate met in the Capitol fortress and so it was the center of the city's politics; in that sense the hill was the head (or most important part) of the city, and perhaps that is how the name really arose. 
Naturally, the plebeians would want to storm the Capitol and seize control of it. 


Worthy Menenius Agrippa.. .




But now a patrician steps on the scene who is not assaulted. He is a very unusual patrician; one who can speak to the people bluffly and pleasantly and make himself liked by them-the antithesis of Marcius. The newcomer is Menenius Agrippa, and the Second Citizen identifies him at once as: 


Worthy Menenius Agrippa,

one that hath always loved the people.





óAct I, scene i, lines 52-53 


Even the extremist First Citizen says, rather churlishly: 


He's one honest enough;

would all the rest were so!





óAct I, scene i, lines 54-55 


Menenius Agrippa's role in history (even the legendary history of the times before 390 b.c., as purveyed by Livy and Plutarch) is confined to the one incident that is about to be related. Nothing else is known of him either before or after. Everything else about him in this play is Shakespeare's own invention. 
In the actual tale told by Livy and Plutarch, the occasion is not a brawl in the street but, in a way, something more serious. The plebeians have decided to secede altogether. If Rome takes all and gives nothing, she is not a true mother and the plebeians will make one for themselves. They withdraw to a neighboring hill and prepare to found a city of their own. 
This is a deadly danger for the patricians, for they need plebeian hands on the farms and in the army. What's more, Rome cannot endure the founding of a neighboring city that is bound to become and remain a deadly enemy. The plebeians must be brought back and, for a wonder, the Senate tried persuasion and gentleness. They sent Menenius Agrippa, a patrician with a reputation for good humor and with no record of animosity toward the plebeians.


A pretty taleÖ




Menenius urges the citizens to desist, saying the shortage of food is the fault of the gods, not of the patricians. The First Citizen answers bitterly that the patricians have cornered the food market and now grind the faces of the poor for their own profit. We are strongly tempted to believe the First Citizen, for all he speaks in prose where Menenius orates La gentle pentameters, especially since Menenius drops the subject and decides to be more indirect. He says: 


/ shall tell you A pretty tale;

it may be you have heard it;





óAct I, scene i, lines 90-91 


The tale he tells is the fable of the organs of the body rebelling against the belly. The organs complain that they do all the work while the belly gets all the food. The belly answers that it is his function to digest the food and send it out to all the body. Without the belly, all the rest of the organs would weaken and die. The Senate and the patricians are then compared to the belly by Menenius. Through their careful management of the commonwealth, the patricians distribute benefits to all. 
The fable may sound well, but surely to the plebeians of the time it must have been unconvincing, since it was precisely their complaint that the patricians were not distributing benefits to all the commonwealth but were reserving them for themselves. 
Plutarch says of the tale, "These persuasions pacified the people conditionally." Note the word "conditionally." Words alone were not enough. The people demanded a reform of the government and got it. 


Ö let me use my sword.. .




Before Shakespeare gets to these reforms, however, he wants to bring on Marcius and display him as he is. Marcius comes whirling in, acknowledges Menenius' greetings in the briefest possible way, and grates out harshly to the citizens: 


What's the matter, you dissentious rogues

That, nibbing the poor itch of your opinion,

Make yourself scabs?





óAct I, scene i, lines 165-67 


Menenius is attended because he speaks gently. Does Marcius think he can get anywhere by scolding? It doesn't matter whether he does or not, for there is no other way he can act, and the First Citizen indicates that by his dryly ironic rejoinder: 


We have ever your good word.





óAct I, scene i, line 167b 


Marcius continues to rail, denouncing them as utterly untrustworthy. He says: 


Trust ye?

With every minute you do change a mind,

And call him noble that was now your hate,

Him vile that was your garland.





óAct I, scene i, lines 182-85 


This is, of course, a standard complaint against the common people; that they are fickle and unreasoning. This dates back to the Greek historians, who showed that the Athenian democracy was subject to radical changes in its policies and that Athenian politicians suffered drastic changes in fortune at the hand of the fickle public-in contrast to the steady policies of Sparta, which was certainly no democracy. (And yet who would prefer the death-in-life of Sparta to the brilliance of Athens?) 
Roman writers referred to the mobile vulgus ("fickle multitude") and about half a century after Shakespeare's death this was abbreviated to "mob," a word now used for any dangerous and disorderly crowd of people. Had Shakespeare had the use of the word it would undoubtedly have appeared somewhere in this speech. 
In Elizabethan England, with its strong oligarchy, the view of the public by "gentlemen" was very much like the view of the Roman patricians. Shakespeare himself was born of a prosperous middle-class family and certainly held himself superior to those he considered plebeian. Furthermore, he was patronized by the aristocracy and liked to identify himself with them. 
When, therefore, he had occasion to speak of the common people, he was rarely kind or sympathetic. He makes much of their dirtiness, greasi-ness, and bad breath. And he is never quite as unkind to them as in this play. This is one reason why Coriolanus is not one of Shakespeare's more popular plays in modern times. His social views embarrass mid-twentieth-century America. 
It may be that Shakespeare is antiplebeian in this play partly because of the conditions in England at the time the play was written. The unpopular Scottish king, James VI, was on the English throne now as James I and there was a rising clamor against him. Voices from below were beginning to be heard against James's theory of absolute monarchy and against his contention that decisions in religion were entirely in the hand of the King. Those voices were to grow louder until (a generation after Shakespeare's death) they led England into revolution and James's son to the headsman's ax. 
If Shakespeare was writing with at least part of his attention fixed on securing the approval of the aristocratic portion of his audience, on whose approval so much depended from an economic standpoint, this was the time for harsh words against the commons. The application would be seen. 
The amazing thing, though, is that with all the animus against the commons which Shakespeare possesses, for both personal and economic reasons, he does not therefore make Marcius sympathetic. His integrity as a writer and his hatred of war forces Shakespeare to display Marcius' reaction to the commons as an overreaction, and the patrician champion loses us at the very start. 
His response to the cry of the people for food, to their protest that they are starving, is: 


Would the nobility lay aside their ruth,

And let me use my sword, I'd make a quarry

With thousands of these quartered slaves, as high

As I could pick my lance.





óAct I, scene i, lines 198-201 


We are acquainted, of course, with people who think the proper answer to the protesting poor is the policeman's club, the cattle prod, and the gun. Such people are difficult to like, and Marcius is one of them. 


Five tribunes. ..




But then Marcius must grumble forth the news that the patricians have not done as he would have liked them to do. They have compromised instead and granted the plebeians a new kind of officer. Marcius describes them as: 


Five tribunes to defend their vulgar wisdoms,

Of their own choice. One's Junius Brutus-

Sicinius Velutus, and-I know not.

'Sdeath! The rabble should have first unroofed the city,

Ere so prevailed with meÖ





óAct I, scene i, lines 216-20 


It was the grant of the tribunes, rather than Menenius' fable, that brought the plebeians back to Rome. The tribunes were officials drawn from the plebeian ranks and elected by the plebeians only. Their purpose was to safeguard the interests of the plebeians and to keep the patricians from passing laws they felt would be unfair to the common people. Eventually, indeed, the tribunes gained the power of stopping laws they disapproved of by merely crying out "Veto!" ("I forbid!"). Not all the power of the government could pass a law against a tribune's veto. 
Actually, the institutions of the Republic developed only gradually and received their familiar form only by 367 b.c. However, later Roman historians tended to push back several of the features into the undocumented period before 390 b.c. to give them the added sanctity of extra ancient-ness. The history of the tribunate during the fifth century b.c. is quite obscure and the supposed first tribunes listed by Plutarch (he names only two out of the five and Shakespeare follows him in this) make no mark in actual history. 
Is Junius Brutus a descendant or relative of the Lucius Junius Brutus who helped found the Republic (see page I-210)? From the name one would suppose so, yet if he were, he would be a patrician and it is of the essence that the tribunes are plebeians. Or was there some dim feeling on the part of the legendmakers that since a Junius Brutus was one of the first two consuls of the Republic, a Junius Brutus ought also to be one of the first two tribunes? 
From the standpoint of the play, of course, it doesn't matter. 


Ö the Volsces ."..




In any case, civil broils must now be buried in the face of a foreign menace. A messenger hurries on the scene asking for Marcius. He says: 


The news is, sir, the Volsces are in arms.





óAct I, scene i, line 225 


At this early stage in their history, the Romans were still fighting for the control of Latium, that section of west-central Italy that occupies a hundred miles of the coast southeast of Rome. It is the home of the Latin language. 
The Volscians were the tribes occupying the southeastern half of Latium. Under the last kings of Rome, they along with the other Latin tribes had been part of a loose confederacy headed by Rome, and it may be that all were more or less under Etruscan control. With the expulsion of the Roman kings and the weakening of the Etruscan hold, the Latin tribes squabbled among themselves. The Volscians fought with the Romans throughout the fifth century b.c. and were in the end defeated. In Marcius' time, however, the long duel was only beginning, 
A deputation of senators comes to see Marcius now. He is their best warrior and they need his help. Marcius has no illusions that the fight will be an easy one, for the Volscians have a gallant leader, Tullus Aufidius. A senator says: 


Then, worthy Marcius,

Attend upon Cominius to these wars.





óAct I, scene i, lines 238-39 


Cominius is one of the two consuls of Rome at this time. They were the chief executives of the city, having replaced the office of the ousted king. The consuls were elected for a one-year term, since the Romans felt that one year was insufficient for any consul to build up a large enough personal following to serve in making himself a king. 
Two consuls were chosen, rather than one, since the rule was that no action could be taken without agreement between them. It seemed reasonable to suppose that neither consul could take any real steps toward tyranny without the other jealously stepping in to stop him. 
The chief duties of the consuls were to be in charge of the armed forces of Rome and to lead the Roman armies in warfare. Cominius, as consul, was to be the army leader, and Marcius, who was not a consul, would have to be a subordinate officer. 
The senators are clearly not at all certain that Marcius will agree to this; a commentary on his sullen spirit of self-absorption. Cominius says hastily: 


It is your former promise.





óAct I, scene i, line 239 


This time, at least, Marcius gives in at once and all sweep off the stage, leaving behind only the two newly appointed tribunes, Sicinius and Brutus. They had come in with the senators but had remained silent. Left alone, they make it clear that they resent Marcius' pride and his harsh taunts. 
Sicinius wonders that Marcius can bear to serve as an underling with Cominius commanding, and Brutus suggests a cynical interpretation, saying that Marcius shrewdly schemes to avoid responsibility in case of disaster:


For what miscarries

Shall be the general's fault, though he perform

To th'utmost of a man; and giddy censure

Will then cry out of Marcius "O, if he

Had borne the business!"





óAct I, scene i, lines 267-71 


Nowhere in the play, however, is Marcius given credit for so devious a nature. Brutus is simply putting his own style of shrewdness into Marcius' mind. What is much more likely is that Marcius doesn't care who commands and who does not, whom Rome praises and whom she does not. All he wants is a chance to fight so that, in any office, he can win his mother's praise. 


Ö to guard Corioles




The fast Roman response to the Volscian threat forces the Volscians to hasten their own plans. Tullus Aufidius is consulting with the Volscian council and one of the Volscian senators says: 


Noble Aufidius,

Take your commission; hie you to your bands:

Let us alone to guard Corioles.





óAct I, scene ii, lines 25-27 


This council of war is taking place in Corioli (or Corioles), a town whose location is now uncertain, and this, in itself, is one of the signs that the story of Coriolanus is legendary. At the time of the traditional date of this war, 493 b.c. (a year after the plebeian uprising, although Shakespeare, in the interest of speeding the action, makes it take place immediately afterward), what records we have indicate that Corioli was not a Volscian city but was in alliance with that portion of Latium which was under Roman leadership. 
It is very likely that the tales of Coriolanus that were dimly remembered had to be adjusted to account for the name. Why should Marcius be remembered as Coriolanus unless he had played a key role in the conquest of that city? So the conquest was assumed. 
And why was Marcius eventually given the name of Coriolanus if it was not because of the conquest of the city? No one will ever know. For that matter, can we be certain that such a man as Coriolanus ever existed at all?


Ö Hector's foreheadÖ




Now, at last, Marcius' mother, Volumnia, is introduced. So is his wife, Virgilia. Virgilia is, however, a shrinking girl, much dominated by her mother-in-law, who is pictured as the ideal Roman matron. She is a most formidable creature and we cannot help but wonder if Marcius' little-boy love for her is not intermingled with more than some little-boy fear. 
Shakespeare makes it plain that Marcius has become something that is his mother's deliberate creation. Even when he was young, she tells her daughter-in-law proudly, all she could think of was how honor (that is, military glory) would become him. She says: 


To a cruel war I sent him,

from whence he returned,

his brows bound with oak





óAct I, scene iii, lines 14-16 


(An oak wreath was the reward granted a soldier who had saved the life of a fellow soldier.) 
Virgilia timidly points out that Marcius might have been killed, but Volumnia says, grimly: 


I had rather had eleven die nobly

for their country than one voluptuously

surfeit out of action.





óAct I, scene iii, lines 25-27 


And when Virgilia gets a little queasy over Volumnia's later reference to possible blood on Marcius' brow, Volumnia then says, in scorn at the other's weakness: 


Away, you fool! It [blood] more becomes a man

Than gilt his trophy. The breasts of Hecuba,

When she did suckle Hector, looked not lovelier

Than Hector's forehead when it spit forth blood




óAct I, scene iii, lines 42-46 


In later centuries the Romans invented a legend to the effect that they were descended from the Trojan hero Aeneas (see page I-20), and it is natural to read this back into early Roman history and to imagine that the early Romans identified strongly with the Trojans. Hector (page I-81) was Troy's greatest fighter.


Ö a gilded butterfly.. .




Volumnia's bloodthirsty and single-minded approach to the notion of military honor makes it plain why Marcius, trained by her, is what he is. But can it be that Shakespeare approves of this sort of mother and finds the product of her training to be admirable? Let's see what follows immediately! 
Valeria, a friend of the family, comes to visit, and describes something she has observed that involves Marcius' young son. She says: 


1 saw him run after a gilded butterfly;

and when he caught it,he let it go again;

and after it again; and over and over he comes,

and up again; catched it again;

or whether his fall enraged him, or how 'twas,

he did so set his teeth, and tear it.




óAct I, scene iii, lines 63-68 


The promising child, in other words, plays cat-and-mouse with a butterfly and ends by killing it in a rage. But why a butterfly? Surely nothing can be as pretty, harmless, and helpless as a butterfly. It isn't possible that we can feel sympathetic for a child that would deliberately and sadistically kill one. And this is clearly the product of Volumnia's bringing up. 
But can we really apply the unreasoning action of a young child to the behavior of the adult Marcius? Surely we can, for Shakespeare makes certain that we do. What does he have Volumnia say to Valeria's tale? She says, calmly: 


One on's father's moods.




óAct I, scene iii, line 70 


It seems reasonable to suppose that Shakespeare admires neither Volumnia's philosophy nor the individuals it produces. 


Ö another PenelopeÖ




Valeria wants Virgilia to come out on the town with her but Virgilia will not. Like a loyal wife, she will stay at home till her husband is back from the wars. Valeria says, cynically: 


You would be another Penelope;

yet, they say, all the yarn she spun in

Ulysses' absence did but fill Ithaca full of moths.




óAct I, scene iii, lines 86-88 


Penelope is the very byword of the faithful wife. Married to Ulysses (see page I-90) but a couple of years when he went forth to Troy, she remained faithful for twenty years in his home island of Ithaca, till he returned. In the last several years, he was rumored dead and many suitors clamored for her hand. She put them off with one ruse or another, the most famous being that she wanted first to finish a shroud she was weaving for Ulysses' aged father, Laertes. Every day she wove and every night she ripped out what she had woven, keeping it up a long time before she was caught. The story of Penelope and the suitors makes up a major portion of Homer's Odyssey. 


Ö to Cato's wish Ö




The Roman forces under Marcius and Titus Lartius (another valiant Roman) are meanwhile laying siege to Corioli. They are met with Volscian resolution and are beaten back at the first assault. Marcius, yelling curses at his soldiers in his usual manner, rushes forward and manages to get inside the city gates, which close behind him. He is alone in an enemy city. 
Titus Lartius, coming up now, hears the news, and speaks of him as already dead. He says, apostrophizing the as-good-as-dead Marcius: 


Thou wast a soldier

Even to Cato's wish, not fierce and terrible

Only in strokes; but with thy grim looks and

The thunder-like percussion of thy sounds

Thou mad'st thine enemies shake Ö




óAct I, scene iv, lines 57-61 


This is taken almost verbatim from Plutarch, where that biographer describes Marcius as a soldier after Cato's heart. The Cato referred to is Marcus Porcius Cato, often called Cato the Censor (an office which he held with vigor), for he was a model of old-fashioned Roman virtue. He was completely honest and completely bound to duty, but he was cold, cruel, sour, miserly, and narrow-minded. He was heartless to his slaves and lacked any tender feelings for his wife and children. As censor, he was perfectly capable of fining a Roman patrician for kissing his own wife in the presence of their children. 
It was perfectly proper for Plutarch to quote Cato in this connection, for he lived over three centuries after Cato. Shakespeare, however, is guilty of negligence in placing the remark in Lartius' mouth without making the necessary modification, for it now becomes an amusing anachronism. The siege of Corioli took place, according to legend, in 493 b.c., and Cato wasn't born till 243 b.c., two and a half centuries later (and didn't become censor till 184 b.c.).


Caius Marcius Coriolanus




But Marcius is not dead. If the tale were not a legend, magnified in the telling, even if we allow a kernel of truth, he would undoubtedly be dead. Perhaps this part of the tale of Marcius was inspired by a similar incident in the life of Alexander the Great. 
In 326 b.c. Alexander was conducting his last major campaign in what was then called India, but in a region which is now part of Pakistan. They laid siege to a town called Multan, which is located about 175 miles southwest of Lahore, on one of the chief tributaries of the Indus. In a fever of excitement, Alexander pressed forward to the walls and managed to climb them and leap into the city without looking to see whether the army was following or not. 
For a while, he was alone in the midst of enemies. One or two men managed to join him and when Alexander was struck down and seriously wounded they protected him until the army made its way into the city. Alexander survived, but it was a very near thing. 
Marcius does better than that, however. No one joins him and he appears on the battlements, bleeding, but not seriously wounded. Only now does the rest of the army, in a fever of enthusiasm, storm the city and take it. 
Marcius then leads part of the army to join Cominius and together they defeat the Volscians under Tullus Aufidius. 
Now the army rings with praises for Marcius, but when Titus Lartius tries to put those praises into words, Marcius says, gruffly: 


Pray now, no more. My mother,

Who has a charter to extol her blood,

When she does praise me grieves me.




óAct I, scene ix, lines 13-15 


This sounds like modesty, like superhuman modesty, but is it? Marcius is a loner. His universe consists of himself alone, plus his mother. He is willing to enter Corioli alone, to fight alone against an army; the soldiers under his command are but a source of annoyance to him. 
Why, then, should he want their praise? Who are they to praise him? Far from this being a true mark of modesty, it might rather be interpreted as the sign of a most confounded arrogance. Only his mother has a right to praise him and even that is not entirely acceptable to him. In the remark, further, he naively reveals the fact that he places his mother (as far as the right of praise is concerned) above Rome. 
Nevertheless, he is not to get away without some mark of favor. Cominius, the consul, gives him an added name, saying:


Ö from this time,

For what he did before Corioles, call him,

With all th'applause and clamor of the host,

Caius Marcius Coriolanus.




óAct I, scene ix, lines 62-65 


It was a Roman custom, when one of their generals won a signal victory over some particular foreign enemy, to give him an additional name taken from the conquered place or people. Sometimes the individual was thereafter known by his new title almost exclusively. 
The most renowned case of this in Roman history is that of Publius Cornelius Scipio. Scipio was the final conqueror of Hannibal, the Carthaginian general, the greatest and most feared enemy Rome ever had in the days of its greatness, and certainly one of the most remarkable captains in the lamentable history of warfare. The battle in which Scipio finally overcame Hannibal was fought at Zama in 202 b.c., a city in northern Africa. As a consequence, the title "Africanus" was added to Scipio's name. 
"Coriolanus" is formed in the same fashion. From this point on in the play, his speeches are marked "Coriolanus" rather than "Marcius" and it is the former name that is given to the tragedy itself. 


Ö Lycurguses. ..




Back at Rome, the citizens are still waiting for news from the army. The two tribunes, Brutus and Sicinius, cannot help but hope for a little bad news, since that would weaken the position of Marcius (they don't yet know his new title). 
Menenius, the friend of Marcius and one who, because of his age, considers himself practically a foster father of the younger man, is also onstage and rails wittily at the uncomfortable tribunes, who lack the verbal agility to stand up to him. Menenius is particularly annoyed because the tribunes call Marcius proud, and at one point he says to them: 


Meeting such wealsmen as you are-

I cannot call you Lycurguses.. .




óAct II, scene i, lines 54-56 


"Wealsmen" are statesmen, a term Menenius uses ironically, since he considers them anything but that. And lest their denseness allow them to mistake his remark for a compliment, he specifically denies that they can be compared to Lycurgus. 
Lycurgus, according to tradition, was a Spartan leader of the ninth century b.c. who devised the social, economic, and political system under which the Spartans lived in ancient times. The Spartan aristocracy devoted themselves to a military regime that made even the Roman system look pallid. (Actually it was developed in the seventh century b.c. and may have been attributed to the legendary Lycurgus to give it greater authority.) 
It was a narrow, constricted, miserable way of life that won the Spartans many victories and therefore gained them much praise by those who valued victories for themselves and who did not have to live in Sparta at the time. It cost Sparta everything else but military victory, and in the end the narrow and inflexible outlook it gave them cost them victory as well. 
Nevertheless, Lycurgus remained as the byword for the statesman and lawgiver. 
Menenius grows wordier and more articulate with each speech as the tribunes become more and more beaten down. Finally, he makes the direct comparison: 


Yet you must be saying Marcius is proud;

who, in a cheap estimation,

is worth all your predecessors since Deucalion.




óAct II, scene i, lines 92-94 


Deucalion was the sole male survivor of a great flood in the Greek legends (see page I-164) and from him all later men were considered to be descended. 


Ö in Galen. ..




But now the three women enter-Volumnia, Virgilia, and Valeria-with news that Marcius is returning in victory. They have letters and there is one for Menenius. 
The voluble old man is so elated at the news, and especially at the grand tale that there is a letter for him, that he throws his cap in the air and declares it is the best medicine he could have. He says: 


The most sovereign prescription

in Galen is but empiricutic [quackish],

and, to this preservative,

of no better report than a horse-drench.




óAct II, scene i, lines 119-21 


This is an even more amusing anachronism than the reference to Cato. Galen was a Greek physician who practiced in Rome and whose books, throughout the Middle Ages and into early modern times, were considered the last word in medical theory and practice. The only trouble is that he was at the height of his career about a.d. 180, nearly seven centuries after the time of Menenius. 


Ö the repulse of Tarquin.. .




Menenius and Volumnia now engage in a grisly counting of wounds and scars on Marcius' body. Volumnia says: 


He received in the repulse

of Tarquin seven hurts i'th'body.





óAct II, scene i, lines 154-55 


After the eviction of Tarquin (see page I-211), the ex-King made several attempts to regain power, first with the aid of the Etruscans and then with the aid of other Latin cities. He was defeated at each attempt, the final battle coming at Lake Regillus in 496 b.c., only two years before the date of the opening scene of Coriolanus. 


I warrant him consul




Coriolanus himself comes now, and his new title is announced to the entire city. He kneels first of all to his mother, and only after her reminder does he address his wife. The city is wild over him and it is clear he can receive whatever honor or office it can bestow on him. Volumnia states, with satisfaction, what is in many minds: 


Only

There's one thing wanting, which I doubt not but

Our Rome will cast upon thee.





óAct II, scene i, lines 206-8 


It is the consulship itself obviously, and Volumnia, as usual, continues to guide her son toward the heights. 
The two tribunes are also aware of the waiting consulship, and they are worried. Sicinius says: 


On the sudden,

I warrant him consul.





óAct II, scene i, lines 227-28 


From their standpoint, nothing could be worse. Coriolanus' reactionary beliefs are well known. He would have killed the plebeians rather than compromise with them in the matter of tribunes. As a willful and determined consul, he might cancel that compromise. As Brutus says: 


Then our office may,

During his power, go sleep.





óAct II, scene i, lines 228-29 


Their only hope is that Coriolanus, through his own pride, will ruin his own chances. 


At sixteen years




We move swiftly to the Capitol, the seat of the government, where the people are gathered to elect the new consuls, of whom Coriolanus is odds-on favorite to be one. 
However, to achieve the goal, Coriolanus must get the vote of the people, and the way in which this was done was to flatter and cajole them, very much as in our own time. In early Roman times, it was customary for a candidate for the consulate to dress humbly, speak softly, and show the scars won in battle. He did so in an unadorned white toga (hence our word "candidate," from the Latin word for "dressed in white"). 
The routine begins with the equivalent of a nominating speech from Cominius, the then-consul, and it sounds very much (allowing for changes in times and manners) like a nominating speech one might make today. Cominius begins: 


At sixteen years,

When Tarquin made a head for Rome,

he fought Beyond the mark of others.





óAct II, scene ii, lines 88-90 


If we allow Tarquin's earliest battle to regain Rome to have been in 509 b.c. and if Coriolanus was sixteen then, we can say he was born in 525 b.c. and was thirty-two years old at the taking of Corioli. If the reference is to one of Tarquin's later attempts, then Coriolanus was younger than thirty-two. 


Be taken from the people




The eloquent summary by Cominius of a career of heroic battling wins over the patricians and Menenius says it remains only to speak to the people. Coriolanus demurs rather churlishly, and the tribunes, seeing their chance, at once demand that the candidate live up to the letter of the custom. 
Coriolanus has this to say of the custom: 


It is a part

That 1 shall blush in acting, and might well

Be taken from the people.





óAct II, scene ii, lines 145-47 


The tribunes could ask no better attitude than that. To say baldly that he wishes to take privileges from the people is absolutely no way to get their vote, and the tribunes rush away to see to it that the plebeians are made aware of Coriolanus' attitude. 


Ö ask it kindly




Coriolanus does put on the uniform of humility, grumbling fiercely at every stage of the game and keeping poor Menenius in a sweat, for the old man is working overtime to keep him quiet and respectful just long enough. 
Coriolanus cannot be so. Try as he might, he ends by being contemptuous as the voting citizens approach. He asks one of them: 


Well then, I pray,

your price o'th'consulship?





óAct II, scene iii, lines 77-78 


To which the citizen makes a most reasonable reply, giving the price of anything requested, however deserving it may be: 


The price is, to ask it kindly.





óAct II, scene iii, line 79 


And that is precisely what Coriolanus, thanks to his mother's teachings, cannot do. 


Ö in free contempt




Almost creaking in the attempt, Coriolanus manages to bend an absolute minimum so that he might make it seem, to inquiring citizens, that he does indeed "ask it kindly." That, combined with his great reputation of the moment, lures the people into promising to vote for him. 
It is only afterward, by comparing notes, that they realize his bending was more seeming than actual and that he did not, for instance, actually show his scars to anyone. (This too sounds like modesty, but it can be interpreted as the result of arrogance. He will not stoop to win the approval of anyone. He wants it as his right and without question.) 
The tribunes are disgusted that the plebeians have been so easily fooled, and Brutus demands impatiently: 


Did you perceive

He did solicit you in free contempt

When he did need your loves; and do you think

That his contempt shall not be bruising to you

When he hath power to crush?





óAct II, scene iii, lines 205-9 


The plebeians, seeing the good sense in this, veer about and decide to withdraw their approval while there is still time and the official vote has not yet been taken. 
(Plutarch says that Coriolanus actually showed his scars and won their favor more fairly. It was only when, on the actual voting day, he showed up with an escort of patricians, in all his pomp and pride, that the plebeians turned from him. Shakespeare's modification fits better the personality the dramatist has decided to portray.) 


Ö Numa's daughter's son




The plebeians are rather embarrassed at having to reverse their votes and the tribunes offer to take the blame. They say the plebeians might claim to have been against Coriolanus all along but that the tribunes had talked them into favoring him. Now, in turning against him, they had merely shaken off the tribunes' propaganda. 
This seems awfully poor. The tribunes were the very spearhead of the antipaitrician and, in particular, anti-Coriolanus, movement. Could the patricians for a moment believe that they had spoken in favor of Coriolanus? Or was Shakespeare merely seizing the opportunity to insert a passage from Plutarch that would lend another bit of historical authenticity to the play? 
He has Brutus tell them all the wonderful things the tribunes would have said about Coriolanus in persuading the plebeians to vote for him: 


The noble house o'th'Marcians, from whence came

That Ancus Marcius, Numa's daughter's son,

Who after great Hostilius here was king;

Of the same house Publius and Quintus were

That our best water brought by conduits hither;





óAct II, scene iii, lines 244-48 


This is straight out of North's translation of Plutarch, almost word for word. 
The Numa referred to is Numa Pompilius, who reigned as second king of Rome, coming to the throne, according to legend, in 716 b.c., after the death of Romulus, Rome's founder. He was a mild and exemplary king, upon whom Roman legend fixed the founding of Roman religion. There was peace in his reign and he was always looked back to as an ideal ruler. 
He reigned till 673 b.c. and was followed by Tullus Hostilius, who ruled till 641 b.c. and who is also mentioned in this passage. 
Following Hostilius, the throne was voted to Ancus Marcius, who, as the passage states, was a grandson of Numa on his mother's side. Thus, Coriolanus was descended from two of Rome's seven kings. 
So much is legendary. The next is probably anachronistic. The city of Rome, in its great days, had its water supplied through aqueducts. No other city of ancient or medieval times had such an elaborate water system. In fact, Rome had a better water system than Shakespeare's London did. Naturally, writers of both ancient and later times tended to be awed by Rome's aqueducts and, if anything, to overemphasize them. 
The Rome of Coriolanus' day was still a small town, quite rude and uncivilized. It certainly had no elaborate aqueducts, but relied on wells and on the Tiber River. The first important aqueducts to be built were constructed in 312 b.c., nearly two centuries after Coriolanus' time. 


And CensorinusÖ




Brutus continues listing Coriolanus' ancestors: 


And Censorinus that was so surnamed

And nobly named so, twice being censor,

Was his great ancestor.





óAct II, scene iii, lines 244-51 


It is very unlikely that Censorinus could have existed. He too must be an anachronism born of the deliberate putting back of Roman customs into the legendary days before the Gallic sack. In Coriolanus' time, there had scarcely been time for one man to serve as censor twice, especially since the office was not founded till 443 b.c., half a century after the events in this play. 


Ö to Antium




While waiting for the vote, Coriolanus discusses foreign affairs with the other soldiers, Cominius and Titus Lartius. The Volscians, while defeated, have not been crushed, and Tullus Aufidius, their great champion, still lives. Titus Lartius had seen him under a safe-conduct and says: 


On safeguard he came to me; and did curse

Against the Volsces, for they had so vilely

Yielded the town. He is retired to Antium.





óAct III, scene i, lines 9-11 


Antium is a coastal Latin town, thirty-three miles south of Rome. (That is the measure of Rome's as yet infant state, that its chief enemies, even after a retreat, were yet little more than thirty miles away.) 
Antium's original fame was as a Volscian stronghold, as it is in this play, and it was not made fully subject to Rome till 341 b.c., a century and a half after Coriolanus' time. In the days of Rome's greatness, it was a favorite seaside resort of wealthy Romans. The Emperor Nero was born there and built a magnificent villa there. 
The modern Italian version of its name is Anzio and under that name it gained a grisly, if fleeting, notoriety during World War II. An Allied amphibious force landed there on January 22, 1944, forming the Anzio bridgehead. It was hoped that this would link up quickly with other forces advancing up the Italian peninsula, but strong German resistance kept the bridgehead bloodily in being for four months, the linkage with the main Allied forces not taking place till May 25. 


Ö this Triton Ö




As Coriolanus and his friends move on to the Senate, they are stopped by the tribunes and get the astonishing news that Coriolanus, who thought he had clinched the vote, is in disfavor with the plebeians after all and is to be denied the consulship. The tribunes make no effort to soften the blow and present the matter arrogantly in the hope that Coriolanus will burst into a rage and harm his own cause further. 
He does. Rather than attempt to placate the tribunes, he plainly states his extreme rightist position concerning the plebeians. 
Then, when the tribune Sicinius orders the raging Coriolanus to remain where he is and peremptorily forbids him to advance toward the Capitol, Coriolanus repeats Sicinius' words with the utter scorn of the born patrician for someone he views as a lowborn rascal. He says: 


Shall remain!

Hear you this Triton of the minnows?

Mark you His absolute "shall"?





óAct HI, scene i, lines 88-90 


Triton was a son of Neptune (Poseidon) in the Greek myths and was pictured as a merman-fish from the waist down. He was usually depicted as blowing a blast on a large sea shell, a blast that might either rouse the winds or calm the sea. In either case, he controlled the waves. Thus, the tribune was being mocked as one who controlled a herd of insignificant rabble and thought he was powerful in consequence. He was a Triton, but of nothing but minnows. 


Ö Hydra hereÖ




Coriolanus turns on the patricians as well, for he maintains that they have given rise to this trouble by foolishly appeasing the plebeians and granting them rights instead of beating them down by force. He says: 


You grave but reckless senators, have you thus

Given Hydra here to choose an officer,





óAct III, scene i, lines 92-93 


The Hydra was a monster that was killed by Hercules as his second labor (see page I-24). It was pictured as a huge sea creature with a dog-like body and eight or nine heads, one of which was immortal. (The picture may have arisen as an improvement on the eight-tentacled octopus.) 
Later mythmakers improved matters by giving the Hydra fifty heads, or one hundred, or even ten thousand. Furthermore, as each head was cut off, two new ones grew into place instantly. Again, the creature was pictured as so poisonous its very odor could kill, and so on. 
Hercules managed anyway. Each tune he cut off a head, he had an assistant sear the stump with fire to prevent new growths. The immortal head he buried under a huge rock and thus, finally, the monster was killed. 
But this made the Hydra a byword for anything with many heads, or anything which reappeared when dispatched. An intricate social difficulty, which bobs up again after each effort made to cure matters, is "Hydra-headed," and in our own times it would seem that all social problems are of this nature. 
Again, the word may well be applied to a mob and it is this metaphor that is being used by Coriolanus. The decision as to the choice of consul has been handed over to the many-headed multitude. 


The aediles. ..




Coriolanus continues in this way, in overwhelming rage, despite all attempts by Menenius and other patricians with common sense to stop him.
Finally, he threatens to take away the plebeians' political gains by force. Now the tribunes have all they want. Not only has Coriolanus lost any possible chance of gaining the plebeian vote; he has committed actual treason by advocating unconstitutional methods of procedure. Brutus cries out: 


The aediles, ho!

Let him be apprehended.





óAct III, scene i, lines 171-72 


The aediles were plebeian officials who had come into existence at the same time the tribunes had. They had a number of responsibilities in their time. They were in charge of the streets, of the distribution of grain, of the public celebrations. Here they appear in their role as protectors of the tribunes; officers empowered to arrest those who threatened the tribunal safety. 


Ö to th'rock TarpeianÖ




Naturally, Coriolanus is not going to submit tamely to arrest; nor, for that matter, are the patricians ready to see him arrested. The aediles can do nothing by themselves, but in a moment the stage swarms with plebeians coming to the aid of their tribunes. A full-fledged riot is in progress, despite everything Menenius can do to try to calm matters. 
The tribune Sicinius manages to seize the floor and denounces Coriolanus, demanding not only his arrest, but his instant conviction of treason and his execution. 


Therefore lay hold of him;

Bear him to th'rock Tarpeian,

and from thence Into destruction cast him.





óAct III, scene i, lines 211-13 


The Tarpeian Rock is a cliff that formed part of the Capitoline Hill (see page I-217). To explain its name a legend arose in later times that went as follows: 
In the first decades of Rome's existence, when it was under its founder and first king, Romulus, there was war with the Sabines, a tribe of the vicinity. The Sabines laid siege to the Capitoline Hill and their chance at victory came through Tarpeia, the daughter of the Roman commander who held sway over the defending forces. 
The Sabines managed to persuade Tarpeia to open the gates for them in return for what they wore on their left arms. (Tarpeia set that condition with reference to the gold bracelets they wore there.) That night she secretly opened the gates, and the first few Sabines, as they entered, threw their shields at her, for they wore their shields on their left arms too. The Sabines, who (like most people) were willing to make use of traitors, but didn't like them, in this way kept their bargain. 
The first criminal to be executed on the Capitoline Hill gave her name, therefore, to the later place of execution. (The story was undoubtedly made up to account for the name and is very unlikely to have even the slightest foundation in historical fact.) 


Ö his trident




Coriolanus draws his sword. He is certainly not going to be led tamely to execution, and the riot sharpens. When the plebeians are temporarily driven off, Menenius and the other patricians manage, just barely, to persuade Coriolanus to leave. He is forced away for his own safety and because there can be no peacemaking as long as he is there to fire up popular resentment with his own strident tongue. 
Menenius says of him when he is gone: 


His nature is too noble for the world:

He would not flatter Neptune for his trident,

Or Jove for's power to thunder. His heart's his mouth:





óAct III, scene i, lines 254-56 


Jupiter (Jove) has the lightning bolt as his chief weapon. Neptune's trident ("three teeth") is the three-pointed spear with which he (like Triton and his shell) calmed the waves or drove them to fury. Both lightning bolt and trident were unique attributes, and if Coriolanus would not stoop to beg for them, how much less would he stoop for a mere consulship. 
And yet does Menenius really believe that this is a sign of nobility-or of stupidity? In his very next speech, he bursts out: 


What the vengeance!

Could he not speak 'em fair?





óAct III, scene i, lines 261-62 


When the plebeians return, Menenius just barely manages to talk them out of their determination for instant execution and gains Coriolanus the chance of a trial.


/ muse my mother




Coriolanus is at home, utterly unrepentant. He feels he has done completely right and would do it again at whatever risk. Only one thing bothers him. His mother, somehow, is not happy. Coriolanus says: 


/ muse my mother

Does not approve me further, who was wont

To call them [the plebeians] woolen vassalsÖ





óAct III, scene ii, lines 7-9 


And when his mother conies in, he says to her in a child's aggrieved tone: 


I talk of you:

Why did you wish me milder?

Would you have me False to my nature?

Rather say I play The man I am.





óAct III, scene ii, lines 13-16 


But she does wish him milder. It is not because she (or Menenius for that matter) are more liberal than Coriolanus or less likely to use harsh measures. It is a matter of being more politic. First get the consulship, by any means, and then, with power, crush the plebeians. She says: 


I have a heart as little apt as yours,

But yet a brain that leads my use of anger

To better vantage.





óAct III, scene ii, lines 29-31 


Menenius and the rest are urging him now to stand trial voluntarily, to repent his words and, in effect, crawl a little. Coriolanus is horrified at the very thought, but his mother adds her pleas, saying in one phrase exactly what is wrong with him: 


You are too absolute;





óAct III, scene ii, line 39 


But that, of course, is her own fault, since she taught him to treat the world as though it consisted of nothing but gilded butterflies which he might tear apart at a mindless whim. 
She tells him now flatly that he must treat this as a stratagem of war. He would play a part to deceive an enemy in arms and cajole a town to surrender. Let him now play a part to deceive the plebeians. (There is no thought in the mind of Volumnia or the other patricians-or probably in those of Shakespeare's audience-that such a course of action is dishonorable.) 
To force Coriolanus to do this, Volumnia does not scruple to pull hard at the Oedipal ties that bind him to her: 


/ prithee now, sweet son, as thou hast said

My praises made thee first a soldier, so,

To have my praise for this, perform a part

Thou hast not done before.





óAct III, scene ii, lines 107-110


That is it. Coriolanus would not be swayed by thoughts of his own safety, by the city's danger, by his friend's reasoning, but once his mother has pled, he says: 


Well, I must do't.





óAct III, scene ii, line 110b 


For a moment, though, his resolution wavers even now. He can't go through with it. Thereupon Volumnia throws up her hands and tells him angrily to do as he pleases. At that, Coriolanus promptly gives in, out of the absolute terror of being in the position of disobeying his mother's wishes. He says, in little-boy terms: 


Pray, be content:

Mother, I am going to the marketplace;

Chide me no more.





óAct III, scene ii, lines 130-32 


And yet, after all that, when he comes to trial, he can no more hold his tongue than he can jump to the moon. It is an easy task for the tribunes to irritate him into madness again. He is convicted of treason and condemned, not to death at the Tarpeian Rock, but to lifelong exile. (This is actually supposed to have taken place in 491 b.c.) 
It is a politic commutation of sentence, for the tribunes could now say that Coriolanus had deserved death, but that they had shown mercy out of consideration for his services in war. 


Ö to pluck from them their tribunes.. .




Coriolanus leaves the city, after showing himself surprisingly cheerful, firm, resolute, and in good heart, cheering up his mother and his friends. (Plutarch describes the leave-taking similarly.) 
Shakespeare has him make a significant comment, however. Coriolanus says: 


I shall be loved when I am lacked.





óAct IV, scene i, line 15 


This is a strange optimism on his part. He does not show elsewhere in this play any such general confidence in his fellowmen. It almost sounds as though he has something specific in mind; that he has firm information that his friends intend to take action to bring him back; even unconstitutional action. 
That this may be so is strengthened by an odd scene that follows hard thereafter and which seems somewhat irrelevant to the action. A Roman named Nicanor and a Volscian named Adrian meet somewhere between Rome and Antium. Their speeches are ascribed merely to "Roman" and "Volsce." They appear nowhere else in the play and the only purpose of the scene is to highlight gathering treason in Rome on the part of the patricians. 
The Roman says: 


Ö the nobles receive so to heart

the banishment of that worthy Coriolanus,

that they are in a ripe aptness to take all power

from the people and to pluck from them their tribunes forever.





óAct IV, scene iii, lines 21-25 


To attain this end, it may be that the patricians are even considering allying themselves with the common enemy. The Volscian had said of his own people: 


Ö they are in a most warlike preparation,

and hope to come upon them [the Romans]

in the heat of their division.




óAct IV, scene iii, lines 17-19 


The Roman's response to this news of the Volscian activity is: 


/ am joyful to hear

of their readinessÖ





óAct IV, scene iii, lines 48-50


My birthplace hate I Ö




Yet the next scene does not follow this up. There is a sudden break. Coriolanus has made his way to Antium. It is his intention to seek out Tullus Aufidius himself and throw himself upon his mercy. He says: 


My birthplace hate I, and my love's upon

This enemy town. I'll enter. If he slay me,

He does fair justice; if he give me way,

I'll do his country service.





óAct IV, scene iv, lines 23-26 


What happened? According to the previous scene, it looked as though there were a conspiracy to bring Coriolanus back, even with Volscian help. Nothing further of that is mentioned in the play. Plutarch, to be sure, says that the nobles turned against Coriolanus, but only after the exiled man had joined the Volscians. As for his motive in joining the enemy, Plutarch cites merely rage and desire for revenge. 
Yet it almost seems as though Shakespeare had something better in mindÖ 
It often happened in the history of the Greek cities that there were internal disturbances between the social classes and that the leaders of one side or the other would be exiled. In such cases, it was common for the exiles to join a foreign enemy and fight their own city with the aid of their sympathizers within, as was the case of Alcibiades, for instance (see page I-142), some eighty years after the time of Coriolanus. (Indeed, Plutarch gives his biographies of Coriolanus and Alcibiades as a pair, showing himself aware of the similarities in their histories.) 
It was this constant civil war and almost constant treason that helped bring down the Greeks and place them at last at the mercy of first the Macedonians and then the Romans. 
It never happened in Rome. There were internecine struggles within the city in plenty throughout the history of the Republic, but never in the face of an outside enemy. When the foreign armies invaded, all Romans locked arms and this was never so remarkable or admirable as when Hannibal nearly ruined the realm two and a half centuries after the time of Coriolanus. It was this which saved Rome and brought her to world empire at last. 
It would almost seem, then, as though there were a missing scene here. Perhaps there should be a scene in Rome after the meeting of the Roman and Volsce, one in which the patricians are meditating treason. The news of the Volscian invasion comes, and after some soul searching, Cominius might rise and insist that the city must come before class and that even Coriolanus must be sacrificed in the greater need of the defense of Rome. And with that the conspiracy would collapse.


Ö our dastard nobles.. .




Coriolanus, hearing of this, is more than disappointed. It is the last straw. Everyone has deserted him. Surely it must be this which makes him turn to the Volscians. Plutarch doesn't have it this way, but Plutarch is only repeating a legend and in my opinion he could have worked it out better at this point. Shakespeare seems to have started in this direction and then never wrote or dropped out the crucial scene. 
It is only that missing scene that can explain what happens next. Coriolanus makes his way, in disguise, to the house of Tullus Aufidius, who is there presiding over a feast to the Volscian nobles, and reveals himself as a suppliant. He tells Aufidius he has nothing left but his name: 


The cruelty and envy of the people,

Permitted by our dastard nobles, who

Have all forsook me, hath devoured the rest.





óAct IV, scene v, lines 78-80 


Why "dastard nobles?" How have they "forsook" him? Only that missing scene would make this plain and account for the colossal bitterness of Coriolanus during the remainder of the play, against not only the plebeians, but the entire city. 
The Coriolanus legend up to this point, by the way, bears a suspicious resemblance to the tale of Themistocles, a famous Athenian who was actually a contemporary of Coriolanus (except that Themistocles is a historical character and Coriolanus is not). 
Themistocles was the moving spirit behind the Athenian-led Greek victory over the Persians in 480 b.c. (thirteen years after the supposed capture of Corioli). After the defeat, however, when Athens was secure, Themistocles' growing pride offended the Athenians. About 472 b.c. he was exiled from the city. In exile, evidence of treason was found against him and he had to make his way to Persia itself as the only place he could be safe. 
On his way there he passed through the city of a man who was his personal enemy-Admetus, King of the Molossians. (Molossia was later known as Epirus and is, in modern times, called Albania.) 
Themistocles came to Admetus in disguise and appealed to him as a fugitive, just as Coriolanus appealed to Aufidius. 
Here the stories part company, however. Themistocles was accepted by Admetus and finally made his way to Persia, where he lived out the remainder of his life. He never took any actual action against Athens. 
Coriolanus did not wish escape. He wished revenge.


Joined with AufidiusÖ




Aufidius accepts Coriolanus' help joyfully. In fact, he offers him generalship over half the army, for what may seem to us perfectly valid reasons. It may seem odd to take the chance of turning over half his forces to someone who until recently had been the chief enemy of the Volscians, but by now Aufidius must know Coriolanus' character well. He must know that Coriolanus has in his mind room for nothing but rage. If the rage is now turned against Rome, the breach between man and city will be made permanent. Coriolanus will have to continue aiding the Volscians, placing his fighting ability and his inside knowledge of Rome at Volscian disposal. And then, when Rome is utterly defeated and wiped out, Coriolanus can be taken care of. 
Rome, meanwhile, is in a temporary state of utter peace and the tribunes congratulate themselves at having brought things to such a happy conclusion. The bad news comes soon enough, however. A messenger dashes in saying: 


It is spoke freely out of many mouths,

How probable I do not know, that Marcius,

Joined with Aufidius, leads a power 'gainst Rome,




óAct IV, scene vi, lines 65-67 


Perhaps this is why the missing scene is missing (either taken out or never written). For the missing scene to have worked, there would have had to be news of a Volscian advance, followed by a patrician refusal to abandon the city, so that Coriolanus would have had to join the enemy in a rage. But then he would merely be joining a marching army as a hanger-on. 
This way, the Volscians don't move until Coriolanus joins them, and the news arrives that not only is the enemy approaching but the exiled Coriolanus is at their head. So, for the sake of this added drama, the missing scene is removed. It means that the meeting between the Roman and the Volsce is made irrelevant and Coriolanus' desertion to the Volscians and his anger against the "dastard nobles" left inadequately motivated. In this case, apparently, Shakespeare had his choice of two lines of development and did not manage to make a clear decision. 


Ö cowardly nobles.. .




The failure to make a clear decision between the two courses of development haunts this sixth scene of the fourth act. At first the patricians seem rather exultant about Coriolanus' assault. Cominius says of the Vol-scians: 


they follow him

Against us brats with no less confidence

Than boys pursuing summer butterflies,




óAct IV, scene vi, lines 93-95 


Cominius is actually proud of Coriolanus' ascendancy over the Vol-scians, but note the picture of butterfly killing again. It is as though Shakespeare were reminding us that a child who is brought up as a butterfly killer may end as a city destroyer. 
In the absence of the missing scene, it is perhaps here that the patricians ought to overcome their sympathy and admiration for Coriolanus and decide that patriotism takes priority. The necessary speech does not occur (perhaps because it was originally in the lost scene and was not shifted when the scene was lost). That it may have at one time been present might be indicated by a bitter remark of Menenius to the tribunes: 


We loved him, but, like beasts

And cowardly nobles, gave way unto your clusters.




óAct IV, scene vi, lines 122-23 


Of course, it might refer to the patricians acceding to the sentence of exile. 


Ö more proudlier




Yet all is not well with Coriolanus, either. He is still Coriolanus and can no more bend to the Volscians, now that he is leading them, than he could ever bend to the Romans. The Volscian officers are uneasy and even Tullus Aufidius is unhappy, saying: 


He bears himself more proudlier,

Even to my person, than I thought he would

When first I did embrace him; yet his nature

In that's no changeling. ..




óAct IV, scene vii, lines 8-11 


And yet he must be used, for he is conquering Rome without even having to fight. Aufidius says:


All places yield to him ere he sits down,

And the nobility of Rome are his;

The senators and patricians love him too.




óAct IV, scene vii, lines 28-30 


Apparently, even though the patricians of Rome have agreed to resist, there remain some who cling more tightly to party than to country. And even those who are intending to resist can do so with only half a heart. 
And yet can the patricians honestly think that the Volscians are willing to serve as nothing more than a bunch of errand boys for them, to help them back to power out of love and kindness? The outside power, brought in to help in an internal fight, stays (all history shows) to help itself at the expense of all. And Aufidius says, at the end of the scene, apostrophizing the absent Coriolanus (to whom he refers by the familiar first name as though the man is someone he can now consider a tool or servant): 


When, Caius, Rome is thine,

Thou art poor'st of all; then shortly art thou mine




óAct IV, scene vii, lines 56-57 


The patricians who decide to resist Coriolanus may be moved by abstract love of country, but they may also be moved by a realization of the danger of accepting foreign help under any circumstances. This is something the Greeks never learned (and few nations since). 


Ö one poor grain or two Ö




Soon Rome knows the worst. It is Coriolanus' vengeful desire to burn it to the ground. Surrender will not satisfy him; only destruction will. (This is purely psychotic unless the patricians had specifically deserted Coriolanus in the scene I postulate to be missing.) 
Cominius, the ex-consul, and Coriolanus' old general, had gone to plead and had been met coldly. Cominius had reminded Coriolanus of his friends in the city and reports that: 


His answer to me was,

He could not stay to pick them in a pile

Of noisome musty chaff. He said 'twas folly,

For one poor grain or two, to leave unburnt

And still to nose th'offense.





óAct V, scene i, lines 24-28 


Even at best, with all possible motive, Coriolanus seems to have skirted the edge of madness here, for as Menenius points out: 


For one poor grain or two!

I am one of those; his mother, wife, his child,





óAct V, scene i, lines 28-29 


There seems little hope for penetrating the red veil of madness that has closed over Coriolanus' vengeful mind. Cominius says: 


Ö all hope is vain

Unless his noble mother and his wife,

Who (as I hear) mean to solicit him

For mercy to his country.





óAct V, scene i, lines 70-74


Wife, mother, childÖ






Even this faint possibility seems to wither. Menenius is urged to try his luck with Coriolanus, but he is thrust scornfully away and Coriolanus denies that anyone, even his dearest, can sway him. He says to Menenius: 


Wife, mother, child, I know not.

My affairs Are servanted to others.





óAct V, scene ii, lines 83-84 


Has Coriolanus the strength to turn against his own mother? Perhaps, but only because he has a substitute. He remains the little boy who must have parental approval. Having brutally turned away Menenius, he turns to Aufidius and seeks approval with what might almost be a simper: 


This man, Aufidius,

Was my beloved in Rome; yet thou behold'st.





óAct V, scene ii, lines 93-94 


Aufidius knows his man. Gravely, he gives him what he wants and tells him he is a good boy: 


You keep a constant temper.





óAct V, scene ii, line 95



Ö I'll speak a little




But now the women come: his wife, his mother, the fair Valeria. His young son is also there. 
Coriolanus kneels to his mother, but holds firm, saying: 


Do not bid me

Dismiss my soldiers, or capitulate

Again with Rome's mechanics.

Tell me not Wherein I seem unnatural.

Desire not T'allay my rages and revenges with

Your colder reasons.





óAct V, scene iii, lines 81-86 


He is determined to place his own grievances above Rome and wishes to cancel his mother's arguments even before she makes them. 
But now Volumnia, in a speech of noble eloquence, shows that she places Rome before him and herself. Too late she tries to teach him that life is not a matter of blows and rages alone; that there are softer and nobler virtues: 


Think'st thou it honorable for a noble man

Still [always] to remember wrongs?





óAct V, scene iii, lines 154-55 


And when Coriolanus remains obdurate, she rises to return to Rome to die and then uses the one remaining weapon at her disposal, and the most terrible of all: 


Come, let us go.

This fellow had a Volscian to his mother;

His wife is in Corioles, and his child

Like him by chance. Yet give us our dispatch.

I am hushed until our city be a-fire,

And then I'll speak a little.





óAct V, scene iii, lines 177-82 


With a terrible understatement, she makes it clear that when the city is burning, she will call down a dying mother's curse upon her son. 


O my mother, motherÖ




And before this Coriolanus cannot stand. He collapses utterly and cries out: 


O my mother, mother! O!

You have won a happy victory to Rome;

But, for your son-believe it, O, believe it!-

Most dangerously you have with him prevailed,

If not most mortal to him.




óAct V, scene iii, lines 185-89 


He turns away; he will not fight further against Rome; and he asks Au-fidius to make peace. Aufidius is willing to do so. With Coriolanus not in the fight, Rome will be difficult to take. It would be better to make the peace, use the results against Coriolanus, and perhaps fight Rome another time when Coriolanus is not present either to help or to hinder. So much we can assume. Aufidius actually says, in an aside, that he is glad at this development since it will help him ruin Coriolanus. 


Ö made for Alexander




In Rome Menenius is gloomy. He tells an anxious Sicinius that he doesn't think Volumnia will prevail; after all, he himself did not. He describes Coriolanus in the most forbidding terms as nothing but a war machine: 


He sits in his state

as a thing made for Alexander.




óAct V, scene iv, lines 22-23 


He is, in other words, as immobile, as aloof, as untouched by humanity as a statue of Alexander the Great. This is an anachronism, for Alexander lived nearly a century and a half after Coriolanus and died in 323 b.c. 
But almost at that moment comes the news that Coriolanus has given in and that the army is gone. Rome goes mad with joy and flocks to the gates to greet Volumnia. 


Ö thou boy of tears




The Volscian army is back in Corioles now and Aufidius is ready to strike and rid himself of the incubus he had earlier accepted; an incubus that would have been worth its cost if it had brought them the destruction of Rome. But it had not, for, as Aufidius says bitterly: 


Ö at his nurse's tears

He whined and roared away your victory;




óAct V, scene vi, lines 97-98


Coriolanus, stupefied, calk on Mars, the god of war, and Aufidius says, with contempt: 


Name not the god, thou boy of tears!




óAct V, scene vi, line 101 


For the first time, Coriolanus has been openly called what he is. He is a boy; a tearful, butterfly-killing mamma's boy who never grew up except in muscles; who did all his warlike deeds so that his mother might clap her hands over him; and who broke up at last when his mother said "Bad boy!" 
Coriolanus cannot accept Aufidius' sneer because in his heart he knows it is true, and he dare not let himself know it consciously. He keeps repeating that word, shouting: 


"Boy!" False hound!

If you have writ your annals true, 'tis there,

That, like an eagle in a dovecote,

I Fluttered your Volscians in Corioles.

Alone I did it. "Boy"?




óAct V, scene vi, lines 113-17 


His last boast is of his feat at Corioli in entering the city and fighting alone. At the end as at the beginning he is alone in the universe, he with his mother. Is that being a boy, he asks? Of course it is. A foolish act of boyish braggadocio is no less foolish because it succeeds. 
And once again, Coriolanus' rage and tactlessness draws down anger upon himself. He is killed by numerous swords that have been prepared for the purpose by Aufidius himself. 
The Volscian nobles are taken aback. They regret the sudden killing without trial, but one says of Coriolanus: 


His own impatience

Takes from Aufidius a great part of blame.

Let's make the best of it.




óAct V, scene vi, lines 145-47 


It is at this point of the climax of self-ruin that Shakespeare ends the tale. 
Plutarch tells a little more. Coriolanus is honorably buried and the city of Rome pays homage to the mother, if not the son, by allowing her to mourn for him the full period of ten months that was then customary. 
And at some time, in a future battle, Tullus Aufidius died in arms against Rome. Roman power grew steadily and Volscian power declined, and in the end it was Rome, Rome, Rome, over all Latium, all Italy, all the Mediterranean world. 








11. The Tragedy of Julius Caesar


The first Plutarchian play (see page I-213) written by Shakespeare (probably in 1599) concerned the time four and a half centuries after Coriolanus. Rome had survived the Gallic sack and the onslaught of Hannibal of Carthage. It had spread itself west and east over the shores of the Mediterranean Sea and now all those shores were either Roman territory or under the control of some Roman puppet king. 
But Rome's troubles were coming from within. There was no longer any serious question of conquest from without. That was impossible and would remain impossible for several centuries. Now, however, there had come an inner struggle. For half a century there had been a sputtering string of conflicts, between generals, for control, and the play opens when the conflict seems to have been decided. 
The victor is the greatest Roman of them all-Julius Caesar. 


.. .get you home




The events of the first scene, in the streets of the city of Rome, are those of October 45 b.c. Caesar has just returned from Spain, where he defeated the last armies of those adversaries that had stood out against him. 
He was now undisputed master of all the Roman realm, from end to end of the Mediterranean Sea. It seemed Rome was ready now to experience a rich and prosperous period of peace under the great Julius. 
Not all of Rome is delighted by this turn of events, however. Those who had opposed Caesar and his policies might have been beaten into silence, but not into approval-and not even always into silence. 
Caesar stood for an utter and thoroughgoing reform of the political system of the Roman Republic, which in the last century had fallen into decay and corruption. In this, he was supported chiefly by the commons and opposed chiefly by the senators and the aristocratic families. 
In the first scene, though, Shakespeare pictures not the aristocratic opposition, but that of a pair of tribunes, Flavius and Marullus. This is odd, for the office of tribune was originally established to protect the commons against the aristocrats (an event which is at the core of the events in Cor-iolanus, see page I-222). One would have thought they would be more likely to support Caesar than oppose him. 
Actually, however, the matter of the tribunes is borrowed by Shakespeare from Plutarch, but is moved earlier in time. If the incident had been left in its Plutarchian place, it would have seemed more apt. 
At any rate, in Shakespeare's version the populace is swarming out to greet the homecoming Caesar, when they are met by the tribunes. One of them, Flavius, cries out: 


Hence! Home, you idle creatures, get you home!





óAct I, scene i, line 1 


Ö rejoice in his triumph




One of the populace, a cobbler, explains the activity: 


Ö indeed, sir, we make holiday to see Caesar

and to re joice in his triumph.





óAct I, scene i, lines 33-34 


The "triumph" was an old Roman custom borrowed from the ancient Etruscans centuries before Caesar's time. A victorious general entered the city in state, preceded by government officials and followed by his army and captured prisoners. The procession moved along decorated streets and between lines of cheering spectators to the Capitol, where religious services were held. (It was rather analogous to the modem ticker tape procession down Fifth Avenue.) 
The day was a high festival, with plenty of food and drink for all at government expense, so that the populace was delighted partly with the aura of victory and partly with the fun. For the general himself, it represented the highest possible honor. 
In My 46 b.c., more than a year before the play opens, Caesar had returned to Rome after nine years of conquest in Gaul and three years of civil war in Greece, Egypt, Asia Minor, and Africa. He had then broken all public records for magnificence by holding four triumphs, one after another, over each of four sets of foreign enemies he had conquered. These were the Gauls, the Egyptians, the Pontines of Asia Minor, and the Numid-ians of Africa. 
After that, he went to Spain for one last victorious battle and now he was returning for one last triumph.


What tributaries Ö




The cobbler's reply but further irritates the tribune Marullus, who cries out in anguish: 


Wherefore rejoice? What conquest brings he home?

What tributaries follow him to Rome,

To grace in captive bonds his chariot wheels?





óAct I, scene i, lines 35-37 


Marullus has a point here. The whole purpose of a triumph was to demonstrate the victories of Romans over their non-Roman enemies-over foreigners. Civil wars in themselves could bring no true conquests; Roman fought Roman so that a Roman victory necessarily implied a Roman defeat as well and a triumph was impossible. 
Caesar, in the course of the civil war, had beaten armies under Roman generals, but he had been careful not to celebrate such victories in specific triumphs. He had brought as prisoners only foreigners who had fought against him, even when these (the Numidians, for instance) had been fighting as allies of Roman factions and even though the Roman soldiers who opposed him bore the brunt of the defeat. 
In his last battle in Spam, however, there were no foreign enemies. He had fought only Romans and if he had a triumph it could be only over Romans. He did not bring home a true "conquest," no true "tributaries," and why, therefore, a triumph? 


Knew you not Pompey.. .




The tribunes can be even more specific. Marullus says: 


Knew you not Pompey? Many a time and oft

Have you climbed up to walls and battlements,

To tow'rs and windows, yea, to chimney tops,

Your infants in your arms, and there have sat

The livelong day, with patient expectation,

To see great Pompey pass the streets of Rome.





óAct I, scene i, lines 40-45 


Gnaeus Pompeius (usually known as Pompey to English-speaking people) was born in 106 b.c. and made a great name for himself as a general at quite an early age, largely because of his talent for being on the right side in the right place at the right time. He won important victories in Spain, for instance, in 77 b.c. against a rebellious Roman general, largely because that general happened to be assassinated at the crucial moment. 
He was given the right to append "Magnus" ("the Great") to his name as a result of early victories, which accounts for the tribune's reference to "great Pompey." 
In 67 b.c. he accomplished something really surprising. Pirates had been infesting the Mediterranean Sea for a long time. They had evaded all Roman force and had all but made trade impossible, when Pompey was called to the task of suppressing them. He was put in charge of the entire Mediterranean coast to a distance of fifty miles inland for three years and was told to use that time for destroying the pirates. He managed to clear them all out in three months! 
He was then put in charge of the Roman armies in Asia Minor. Again, this was a tremendous piece of luck for him. An earlier Roman general, competent but unpopular, had almost completed the job when his troops rebelled. Pompey took over, cleared up the last remaining forces of the enemy, and got all the credit. 
In 61 b.c. he returned to Rome and at the age of forty-five received the most magnificent triumph Rome had seen up to that time. It is presumably partly with reference to this triumph that the tribunes spoke of the people waiting to see the great Pompey. 
Pompey was not of a great aristocratic family himself and would have been proud to be accepted by the senators as one of their own. The senators, however, had learned from experience that successful generals of the non-aristocratic classes could be dangerous, and they watched Pompey carefully. 
Yet Pompey had done his best to earn senatorial approval. On returning to Italy in 61 b.c. after his victories, he had disbanded his army and had taken his place in Rome as a private citizen. This had merely gained him a total loss of influence. He could not even persuade the Senate to approve the award of bonuses to his faithful soldiers. 
Pompey was forced to turn elsewhere. He formed an alliance with Marcus Licinius Crassus, the richest man in Rome, and with a skillful and charming orator and politician, Julius Caesar. Caesar was then an impoverished aristocrat (who nevertheless opposed the Senators) in the employ of Crassus. 
The three together, in 60 b.c., formed the First Triumvirate (triumvir means "three men") and ruled Rome. 
The three took advantage of their power to parcel out provinces for themselves. Caesar, born in 100 b.c., and by far the most capable of the three, obtained for himself the governorship of that portion of Gaul ruled by Rome (a portion that included what is now northern Italy and southern France). He used that as a base from which to conquer the rest of Gaul. Fighting his first battles at the age of forty-four, he surprised everyone by showing himself to be a military genius of the first rank. 
Pompey, who was assigned the governorship of Spain, but who let deputies run it while he himself remained in Rome, was not entirely pleased by Caesar's sudden development of a military reputation. As for Crassus, he was jealous enough to take an army to the east to fight the Parthians, who ruled over what had once been the eastern part of the Persian Empire. In 53 b.c. he lost a catastrophic battle to them at Carrhae, and lost his life as well. 
Pompey and Caesar now shared the power, with no third party to serve as intermediary. 
By now the senatorial conservatives, frightened by Caesar's success and recognizing Pompey as far the less dangerous of the two, had lined up solidly behind the latter. 
Pompey, flattered by aristocratic attentions, let himself be wooed into open opposition to his erstwhile ally. When Caesar's term as governor of Gaul came to an end, the Senate, buoyed up by Pompey's support, arrogantly ordered Caesar to return to Rome at once without his army. This was technically in order since it was treason for any Roman general to bring a provincial army into Italy. 
Caesar, however, knew that if he arrived in Rome without his army, he would be arrested at once on some charge or other, and might well be executed. 
So after hesitating at the Rubicon River (the little Italian creek which was the boundary of Italy proper, in the Roman view) he made his decision. On January 10, 49 b.c., he crossed the Rubicon with a legion of troops and a civil war began. 
Pompey found, much to his own surprise, that Caesar was far more popular than he, and that soldiers flocked to Caesar and not to himself. He was forced to flee to Greece and the senatorial party fled with him. Caesar followed and at a battle in Pharsalia, Greece, on June 29, 48 b.c., Caesar's army smashed that of Pompey. 
Pompey had to flee again, almost alone, to Egypt, which was then still independent of Rome. The Egyptian government, however, was afraid to do anything that might displease Caesar, who was clearly the coming man. They therefore assassinated Pompey the instant he landed on Egyptian soil. 
Caesar followed, and remained in Egypt for a while. There he met Cleopatra, its fascinating young queen. 
Caesar next traveled to Asia Minor, and then to Africa, to defeat die-hard armies allied to those who shared the views of the dead Pompey and the senatorial party. Only then did he return to Rome for his quadruple triumph.


Ö Pompey's blood




In no part of that quadruple triumph did Caesar commemorate his victory over Pompey himself. In fact, as a deliberate stroke of policy, Caesar forgave such of the Pompeian partisans as he could and did his best to erase hard feelings. His mission, as far as possible, was to unite Rome and put an end to the civil broils through conciliation. 
And yet the Roman tribunes in their harangue to the populace bring up Pompey, reproachfully, in connection with this last triumph of Caesar, and Marullus says to the gathered people: 


And do you now put on your best attire?

And do you now cull out a holiday?

And do you now strew flowers in his way

That comes in triumph over Pompey's blood?





óAct I, scene i, lines 51-54 


By "Pompey's blood" is not meant Pompey's death in defeat, as might seem, but Pompey's kinsmen. 
Pompey had two sons, the elder of whom shared his father's name and was Gnaeus Pompeius Magnus also. We can call him Gnaeus Pompeius to differentiate him from his father, whom we can still call simply Pompey. 
Gnaeus Pompeius remained with the senatorial party after his father's death. He had a fleet in his charge and he brought it to Africa (where the modern nation of Tunis exists), putting it at the service of the largest remaining senatorial army. When Caesar defeated it in April 47 b.c., Gnaeus Pompeius escaped to Spain. 
After the quadruple triumph, only Spam was left in opposition. Caesar took his legions there and in March 45 b.c. a battle took place at Munda in southern Spain. 
The senatorial army fought remarkably well and Caesar's forces were driven back. For a time, indeed, Caesar must have thought that years of invariable victory were going to be brought to ruin in one last battle (as had been the case of Hannibal of Carthage a century and a half earlier). So desperate was he that he seized a shield and sword himself, rushed into battle (he was fifty-five years old then), and shouted to his retreating men, "Are you going to let your general be delivered up to the enemy?" 
Stung into action, the retiring legions lunged forward once more and carried the day. The last senatorial army was wiped out. Gnaeus Pompeius escaped from the field of battle, but was pursued, caught, and killed. (Pompey's younger son escaped and lived to play a part in the events that took place some six years later, and in another of Shakespeare's plays, Antony and Cleopatra.)
Now, returning from Spain, Caesar was celebrating Ms victory over Gnaeus Pompeius and it was in this sense that he came in "triumph over Pompey's blood." 


Ö the feast of Lupercal




The populace disbands and leaves the stage, presumably returning to their houses in guilt. The tribune, Flavius, then suggests that they tear down the decorations intended for the triumph. Marullus hesitates, for it may be sacrilege. He says: 


May we do so?

You know it is the feast of Lupercal.





óAct I, scene i, lines 69-70 


The Lupercalian festival was an ancient fertility rite whose origins are lost in antiquity and probably predate civilization. It involved the ritual sacrifice of goats, which were noted for being ruttish animals. 
Strips of the skin of the sacrificed goats were cut off by the priests in charge. They then ran about the Palatine Hill, striking out with those thongs. Anyone struck would be rendered fertile, supposedly, and sterile women therefore so placed themselves at the rites as to make sure they would be struck. 
The "feast of Lupercal" was held each year on February 15 and this was not the day of Caesar's last triumph at all (as would appear from the play), but four months later. Shakespeare, however, commonly compresses time in his historical plays (a compression that is a dramatic necessity, and even a dramatic virtue), and here he lets the four months pass between the driving off of the populace and the next speech of the tribunes. There is no further talk of the triumph. 
One would suppose from this first scene that the triumph was somehow aborted and never took place. It did take place, of course. The chief point of the scene is to show that there is opposition to Caesar. 


Ö in servile fearfulness




Flavius shrugs off the possibility of sacrilege. It is more important to resist Caesar's pretensions. He says: 


These growing feathers plucked from Caesar's wing

Will make him fly an ordinary pitch,

Who else would soar above the view of men

And keep us all in servile fearfulness.





óAct I, scene i, lines 75-78 


The battle in Caesar's time did not really involve liberty in our modern sense. On the one hand was a time-honored but distorted and corrupt senatorial government, inefficient and dying. On the other was the one-man dictatorship of Julius Caesar, intent on fundamental reform and a centralized government. 
There would have been no freedom for the common people anywhere, even in Rome, under either form of government. Under Caesar, however, the government would certainly have been more efficient and the realm more prosperous. That this is so is demonstrated by the fact that when Caesar's heir and successor founded a Caesar-type government (the Roman Empire), it led to two centuries of unbroken peace and prosperity. 
During that peaceful tune, however, literary men had leisure to look back on the decades before the establishment of the Empire and to regret the hurly-burly of politics and the active drama of contending personalities. It seemed to them that they and their senatorial patrons lived in a gilded prison (and indeed the senators sometimes suffered, when suspicious emperors suspected treason among them). It became fashionable to look back with nostalgic sadness to the days of the Roman Republic. 
The senatorial party of Caesar's time then came to be called "Republicans" and to be viewed as exponents of "liberty." They were entirely idealized and in this fashion were passed on to Shakespeare and to us. We need not be deluded, however. The senatorial notion of "liberty" was the liberty of a small group of venal aristocrats to plunder the state unchecked. 


Calphurnia




The scene shifts now to another part of Rome, where Caesar and many with him are on their way to attend the Lupercalian rites. Caesar's first word in the play is to call his wife: 


Calphurnia!





óAct I, scene ii, line 1 


Caesar had three wives altogether. He married his first wife in 83 b.c. when he was not yet seventeen. She was the daughter of a radical antisena-torial politician, and it was from this connection, probably, that Caesar began to get his own antisenatorial philosophy. When Caesar's father-in-law was killed and the conservatives gamed control and initiated a blood-bath (the radicals had had their turn previously), Caesar was ordered to divorce his wife. He refused! It might have then gone hard with him as a result, but the young man's aristocratic connections saved his life. 
Caesar's first wife died in 67 b.c. and he made a politically convenient second marriage, taking as wife Pompeia, the daughter of Pompey, who was then at the height of his career. 
In 62 b.c. a certain young scapegrace named Publius Clodius (called "Pulcher" or "good-looking") played a rather foolish practical joke. He dressed himself in women's clothing and got himself into Caesar's house at a time when a religious festival was in process which only women could attend. 
He was caught and it was a great scandal. Many whispered that it could not have been done without the co-operation of Pompeia and even wondered if Clodius might not be Pompeia's lover. Pompeia was almost certainly innocent, but Caesar divorced her at once with the famous remark that "Caesar's wife must be above suspicion." Actually, he was probably tired of her and was glad of a face-saving excuse for the divorce. 
After Caesar had formed the triumvirate with Pompey and Crassus, he married again, for the third and last tune, to Calpurnia (or Calphurnia, as Shakespeare calls her). She was a daughter of one of Pompey's friends, and it was therefore, in a sense, another political marriage. 


Ö in Antonius' way Caesar has a simple direction for Calphurnia:

Stand you directly in Antonius' way When he doth run his course.





óAct I, scene ii, lines 3-4 


Antonius, it seems, will be one of those who will race along wielding the goat-hide thongs at the Lupercalian festival. Since Calphurnia has had no children, and Caesar would like a direct heir, it will be useful for her to be struck. 
The Antonius referred to is Marcus Antonius, far better known, in English, as Mark Antony. He was born in 83 b.c. and was thirty-eight years old at the time of this Lupercalian festival. He was related to Julius Caesar on his mother's side and had joined the general while he was in Gaul. He had remained loyally pro-Caesar ever since. 
Mark Antony had been tribune in 49 b.c. when Pompey and the Senate were trying to force Julius Caesar to come to Italy without his army. Mark Antony and his fellow tribune did what they could to block senatorial action, then fled to Caesar's army, claiming they were in danger of their lives. Since tribunes were inviolate and might not be harmed, Caesar had the excuse he needed to cross the Rubicon with his army. 
While Caesar was in Greece and Egypt fighting the civil war, Mark Antony held the fort in Rome itself and didn't do a very good job of it. 
Caesar continued to value him for his absolute loyalty, however, and they remained together to the end. 


Ö the ides of March




And then a voice calls Caesar's name. It is a soothsayer, a man who foresees the future. This time his message is a simple one: 


Beware the ides of March.





óAct I, scene ii, line 18 


To understand the matter of "the ides" we must consider the Roman calendar, which must set some sort of record for inconvenience. 
Each of the Roman months has three key dates and the other days are defined as "so many days before the such-and-such key date." Nor are the key dates regularly spaced or quite the same from month to month. 
The first day of each month is the "calends" of that month. 
Not long after the calends come the "nones." The nones fall on the fifth day of January, February, April, June, August, September, November, and December, and on the seventh day of March, May, July, and October. 
The word "nones" means "nine" because it falls nine days before the third key date, the "ides," where the nine days count the day of the ides itself. The ides, therefore, fall on the fifteenth day of March, May, July, and October, and on the thirteenth day of the other months. 
From all this we gather that the "ides of March" is what we could call March 15 today. The Lupercalian festival, which falls on February 15, is not, however, on the "ides of February," for that date would be what we now call February 13. 


I am not gamesomeÖ




Calmly, Caesar ignores the mystic warning and passes on to the festival. The incident of the soothsayer is not a Shakespearean invention, but is referred to in Plutarch. 
That, of course, does not necessarily make it authentic. The event of the ides of March was so dramatic and so clearly a turning point of history that numerous fables arose afterward of all sorts of supernatural omens and forebodings preceding it. The incident of the soothsayer is only the most restrained and dramatically satisfying one of them. 
After Caesar and his party pass on, two men remain behind: Brutus and Cassius. Cassius asks if Brutus intends to watch the festival and Brutus says he won't, for:


/ am not gamesome: I do lack some part

Of that quick spirit that is in Antony.





óAct I, scene ii, lines 28-29 


No, he is not gamesome (that is, "merry" or "gay"). The Romans, somehow, usually aren't in literature. They are generally presented as grave, portentous, dignified men, given to declamations in high-sounding phrases, and that is exactly how Brutus is presented. 
He is Marcus Junius Brutus, born in 85 b.c., and therefore just past forty at this time. 
Brutus was the "Republican" most idealized by later historians, but he was by no means an admirable character in real life. 
To begin with, he was a nephew of Cato, one of Caesar's most obdurate and steadfast enemies. It is not surprising, then, that Brutus was also an enemy of Caesar's to begin with. Indeed, he fought on Pompey's side in Greece and was taken prisoner when Pompey was defeated. 
Caesar, however, followed a consistent policy of leniency toward his enemies, feeling, perhaps, that in this way he converted them to friends and healed the wounds inflicted by civil war. So Brutus was pardoned and set free. 
The policy seemed to have worked in Brutus' case, for he behaved as though he were converted from a Pompeian into a sincere Caesarian. When Caesar went to Africa to take care of the senatorial armies there, those had, as one of their most important leaders, Cato, who was Brutus' uncle. And yet Brutus remained one of Caesar's lieutenants and served him loyally in the province of Cisalpine Gaul (in what is now northern Italy). 
Later on, crucially and fatally, he abandoned Caesar once again. The later idealization of Brutus has him acting out of conviction and principle, but a glance at his career before the opening scenes of Julius Caesar would make it seem that he was, rather, a self-serving turncoat. 


Ö Cassias.. .




Brutus is unwilling that his lack of gamesomeness should interfere with Cassius' pleasures. He says: 


Let me not hinder, Cassius, your desires;

I'll leave you.





óAct I, scene ii, lines 30-31 


Cassius' full name is Gaius (or Caius) Cassius Longinus, and he is a capable soldier. He went with Crassus to the East as second-in-command. After the disastrous defeat which almost destroyed the Roman army, thanks in good part to Crassus' incapacity, Cassius took over and brought what was left of the army safely back to Roman territory. 
He was also with Pompey at first, but after Pompey's defeat he reassessed the situation. He had not been captured, but it seemed to him that Caesar was sure to win, and Cassius intended to be on the winning side. He followed Caesar into Asia Minor and threw himself on the conqueror's mercy. Caesar pardoned him and let him serve under him. 
Cassius married Junia, the sister of Brutus, and was, therefore, Brutus' brother-in-law. 


Your hidden worthinessÖ




But now that Brutus makes ready to leave Cassius, Cassius gently restrains him. He has a use for Brutus and to serve that use he begins, carefully, to seduce him with praise. He tells Brutus that he is too modest and does not sufficiently value himself, saying: 


Ö it is very much lamented, Brutus,

That you have no such mirrors as will turn

Your hidden worthiness into your eye,

That you might see your shadow.





óAct I, scene ii, lines 35-38 


Somehow the general idealization of Brutus is such that most of those who read or see this play imagine that Brutus is presented in heroic colors; and, indeed, the play is often produced with Brutus as the hero. Yet a close reading seems to show that Shakespeare is utterly out of sympathy with Brutus and makes him rather a despicable character. 
Cassius bemoans Brutus' modesty, but there is no modesty in Brutus as portrayed by Shakespeare. Brutus always listens complacently to those who praise him, and praises himself often enough. Nor does Cassius for a moment really believe that Brutus is modest, for in the rest of the scene his attempt to win over Brutus to a desired line of action is pitched entirely to Brutus' overweening vanity. 


Ö Caesar for their king




Cassius' smoothly scheming flattery is interrupted by the sound of shouting in the distance, and Brutus cries out: 


What means this shouting? I do fear the people

Choose Caesar for their king.





óAct I, scene ii, lines 79-80 


The word "king" had a dread sound to Romans throughout their great days, a dread that dated back to the hated Tarquin (see page I-211). The tale of Tarquin was a heritage of every Roman schoolboy, as the tale of George III is of every American schoolboy, and a stanch republicanism was inculcated in the former case as it is in the latter. 
Then too, in the two centuries preceding Julius Caesar's period of power, Rome had been more or less continuously at war with the various Hellenistic nations of the eastern Mediterranean, all of which were ruled by kings. Kings were the enemy and were therefore hated; and the kings were always defeated by the Roman republicans, so that the institution of monarchy had the aura of defeat about it. 
Consequently, Caesar was in a dilemma when he took power over Rome. He simply had to reform the government, which had come to be utterly stagnant and unworkable, but he could not do so by ordinary legal means. That would require working through the Senate, and the Senate was hostile and obstructionist. Hence, he had to rule dictatorially, by decree. 
The Roman system of government allowed for rule by decree under certain conditions. A special official could be elected for six months who would have the power to rule by decree. He was a "dictator" (from a Latin word meaning "to say," because what he said became law without further ado). A famous early (and legendary) dictator was Cincinnatus, who in 458 b.c. held the dictatorship for only a few days to meet an emergency. 
In later times the device was broadened. In 81 b.c. the Roman general Lucius Cornelius Sulla made himself dictator and held the post for two years. This was with the connivance of the Senate, whose cause Sulla favored. 
Caesar took advantage of the broadening and turned it against the Senate. He had taken the power of a dictator during the civil war and at the time of the quadruple triumph had had himself declared dictator for a term of ten years. After the Spanish triumph, which opens this play, he was made dictator for life. 
He used the dictatorship to bring about his program of reform. He tried to reform the Senate by wrenching it out of the hands of the few oligarchs who monopolized it and allowing the entry of important families from the provinces. He broadened the base of citizenship, revised the taxation procedure, reconstructed cities, improved trade, passed laws designed to strengthen the moral structure of society, and reformed the calendar so that it was almost the one we use today. He even established the first public library. 
Yet although he was dictator for life, Caesar felt it was not enough. As merely dictator, his death would be the sign for a new struggle for power, and all his reforms would be undone. That placed a premium on his death and made his opponents eager for an assassination. If he were king, however, Ms power would merely descend to his nearest heir upon his death, and there would be far less point to killing him. 
It was this desire of Caesar to make himself king-a desire imputed to him by the senatorial conservatives, and probably justly so-that was the chief weapon against him. The conservatives, who hated him and his reforms, emphasized his ambition for the kingship, hoping that the hated word would turn the populace against Caesar. 
On the other hand, the conservatives also feared that the popularity of his reforms might more than make up for the fearsomeness of the word, and that the infatuated populace, caught up on the occasion of some holiday such as the present Lupercalian festival, would be stampeded into declaring him king and that the Senate would then be forced, much against its will, to go along. Once that was done, it would be too late to expect to turn back the tide of reform. 
It was exactly this that Brutus feared when he heard the shouting. 


Ö the waves of Tiber




Brutus' outspoken fear of Caesar as king heartens Cassius. He plays on that fear by describing the indignity of having to bow down to one who after all is but a man and perhaps not even as good a man as oneself. To make his point, he tells a tale of a contest between himself and Caesar. 
One cold day Caesar challenged Cassius to swim across the river. Caesar wearied first and cried out for help. Cassius says: 


I, as Aeneas, our great ancestor,

Did from the flames of Troy upon his shoulder

The old Anchises bear, so from the waves of Tiber

Did I the tired Caesar.





óAct I, scene ii, lines 112-15 


The Tiber River is 252 miles long and is the second longest river in Italy. It would bear little distinction as a river were it not that, like some other short rivers, such as the Thames, the Seine, and the Spree, a great capital was located on its banks. The city of Rome was founded twenty miles upstream from its mouth. 
Here again there is a reference to Aeneas as the ancestor of the Romans (see page I-20). 
Like a Colossus.. . In all Cassius' clever speaking, he doesn't once accuse Caesar of tyrannical behavior or of cruelty; he doesn't say his reforms are wicked or evil. 
He concentrates entirely on Caesar's physical weakness and poor health, for he is endeavoring to show Brutus that Caesar is inferior, hoping that Brutus' inordinate vanity would then rebel at bowing down to such a ruler. 
He labors to find a way to describe the greatness of Caesar and the comparative littleness of Brutus in such a way as to force Brutus to rebel. Cassius says: 


Why, man, he doth bestride the narrow world

Like a Colossus, and we petty men

Walk under his huge legs and peep about

To find ourselves dishonorable graves.





óAct I, scene ii, lines 135-38 


The Colossus is a statue of the sun god built in the island of Rhodes in 280 b.c. to commemorate the successful defense against a siege by a Macedonian general, Demetrius. Why the name "colossus" was applied to a huge statue is unknown, but this Rhodian statue, the largest in the Greco-Roman world, 105 feet tall, was the Colossus of Rhodes. It was considered one of the Seven Wonders of the ancient world. 
It did not, however, remain long to gladden the eyes of those who value size in art. In 224 b.c., little more than half a century after it had been built, it was toppled by an earthquake. 
Once it was gone, the description of what it had looked like while it was standing gradually grew more grandiose, until finally the tale arose that it had straddled Rhodes' harbor and that ships had sailed between its legs in and out of that harbor. This is, of course, quite impossible, for the ancient Greeks had lacked the materials and technique to build a statue so large in a position that would place so much strain on the legs. 
The picture is nevertheless a dramatic one, and Cassius, by whose time the statue had been out of existence for nearly two centuries, uses it to fire up Brutus' vanity and envy. 


Ö a Brutus onceÖ




Cassius plays on Brutus' pride of ancestry too, saying: 


There was a Brutus once that would have brooked

Th'eternal devil to keep his state in Rome

As easily as a king.





óAct I, scene ii, lines 159-61


Brutus considers himself to be descended from Lucius Junius Brutus, who, according to legend, helped overthrow King Tarquin and set up the Roman Republic (see page I-211). 


Ö and Cicero




Brutus' vanity is not proof against Cassius' skilful seduction, and he admits that he resents Rome's present situation. 
Before matters can go further, though, Caesar comes back onstage, returning from the festival with others crowding around him. 
Caesar is clearly angry and those about him look perturbed. Brutus, surprised at this, says to Cassius: 


Calphurnia's cheek is pale, and Cicero

Looks with such ferret and such fiery eyes

As we have seen him in the Capitol,

Being crossed in conference by some senators.





óAct I, scene ii, lines 185-88 


Marcus Tullius Cicero, though he plays only a small part in this play, was actually the most important man in Rome in Caesar's time, next to Caesar himself. 
He was born in 106 b.c. of middle-class family and received an excellent education in Greece. He returned to Rome in 77 b.c. and quickly became Rome's outstanding lawyer and orator (the two went together). He made himself famous by prosecuting one of the particularly crooked Roman provincial governors of the time, Gaius Verres, in 74 b.c. 
In 63 b.c. he reached the pinnacle of his career when, as consul, he scotched a dangerous conspiracy against the Roman government by a debt-ridden nobleman, Lucius Sergius Catilina (known in English as Catiline), and had its leaders executed. 
He never reached such heights again. He was not brave enough or skillful enough to be an effective opponent of Caesar. In fact, Caesar had his lackey, Publius Clodius (the same who invaded the women's religious festival and made it possible for Caesar to divorce his second wife), to so vilify and harass Cicero as to drive the latter out of Italy altogether in 59 b.c. 
Mark Antony had an undying hatred for Cicero, since Antony's foster father had been an associate of Catiline and had been among those executed at the instigation of Cicero. Cicero returned the hatred. 
Cicero was a friend of Pompey, who, he thought, would be able to dominate Rome and defeat Caesar. When Pompey found he could not retain Italy and fled to Greece, Cicero, greatly disconcerted, left Italy with him. Cicero grew more and more disturbed at developments among the Pompeian forces and after the Battle of Pharsalia returned to Italy, determined to take a chance on Caesar's mercy rather than fight on with the remnants of a doomed cause. Caesar did not disappoint him; he pardoned Cicero and treated him kindly. Thereafter, Cicero displayed a wary neutrality, neither opposing Caesar's reforms openly nor supporting them, either. 
Cicero was a debater rather than a warrior, and he was at home in the battle of words in the Senate rather than in the battle of swords on the field. Hence his angry red eyes (a ferret's eyes are red) reminded Brutus of his appearance when he was opposed in senatorial debate. 


Ö always I am Caesar




But even while Brutus and Cassius observe Caesar and his company in astonishment, Caesar is observing them as well. He remarks upon Cassius, particularly, to Antony, in a famous and much quoted passage: 


Yond Cassius has a lean and hungry look;

He thinks too much: such men are dangerous.





óAct I, scene ii, lines 194-95 


But after elaborating on Cassius' gravity and on his inability to have fun and thus allow his possible feelings of envy to evaporate in pleasure, Caesar adds hastily: 


I rather tell thee what is to be feared

Than what I /ear; for always I am Caesar.





óAct I, scene ii, lines 211-12 


Caesar, as portrayed by Shakespeare, strikes wooden poses constantly. He is like a speaking statue, rather than a human being. 
This is not and cannot be historical. All our sources seem to unite in assuring us that Caesar had infinite charm and could win over almost anyone, given half a chance. He was second only to Cicero as an orator and his surviving Commentaries, in which he describes his wars in Gaul and the civil war, are ample evidence of his ability as a writer. 
He was a remarkably witty and intelligent man; a most human man. He was miles removed from the cardboard strutter in Shakespeare and was in real life much more like George Bernard Shaw's portrayal of him in Caesar and Cleopatra. 
Why does Shakespeare portray him so woodenly then? Unfortunately, it was the fashion to describe ancient Romans like that. This fashion stems from the plays of the Roman philosopher Lucius Annaeus Seneca, who wrote about a century after Caesar's death. His are among the most fustian plays ever written, full of emotional sound and fury, blood and horror, and empty, high-sounding speeches. 
The general public loved them so that they survived to be copied, alas, by playwrights in early modern times. Shakespeare himself wrote tragedies after the style of Seneca, notably Titus Andronicus (see page I-391). 
A French poet, Marc Antoine Muret, wrote a tragedy entitled Julius Caesar in Latin in 1553. He followed the style of Seneca and made Caesar into a wooden poseur. This was popular too, and one theory is that when Shakespeare wrote his tragedy, he had to keep Caesar in this form because the audience expected it and would not accept any other version. 
We might imagine that Shakespeare did so against his will, for he follows Caesar's pompous claim to fearlessness with an immediate confession of weakness on the part of the great man. Caesar goes on to say to Mark Antony: 


Come on my right hand, for this ear is deaf,

And tell me truly what thou think'st of him.





óAct I, scene ii, lines 213-14 


Ö a crown offered himÖ




Caesar and his followers leave again, but one remains behind, held back by Brutus. The man stopped is Casca, who is pictured by Shakespeare as a rough, coarse individual, the kind who has no "book learning" and is proud of it. He is Publius Servilius Casca in full, and his only mark in history is his participation in the conspiracy which Cassius is now working up. 
Casca is asked as to the events at the festival that caused Caesar to look so put out. Casca says: 


Why, there was a crown offered him; and being offered him,

he put it by with the back of his hand, thus;

and then the people fell a-shouting.




óAct I, scene ii, lines 220-22 


Apparently Mark Antony took the occasion of the festival, when public spirits were high, and enthusiasm for Dictator Julius was loud, to offer him a linen headband wreathed in laurel. The laurel wreath was well within the Roman tradition. It was a symbol of victory, borrowed from the Greek custom of crowning the victors of the Olympian games in laurel wreaths. 
The linen headband was, however, a "diadem," the symbol of monarchy among the kings of the East. For Caesar to put on this particular laurel wreath was tantamount to claiming the position of king. (In later times, gold replaced linen and it was a gold circlet, or crown, that became the symbol of royalty. Shakespeare transmutes the diadem into a crown so that the audience might understand.) 
Caesar's stratagem seems obvious. The diadem is made to look as harmless and as Roman as possible by means of the laurel decoration. Ostentatiously, he refuses it, hoping that the crowd, in its enthusiasm, will demand that he accept it. Caesar would then graciously accede to their clamor and become king by the will of the people. 
Unfortunately, the crowd did not react this way. Instead of demanding he accept the diadem, they cheered him for refusing it. Twice more Mark Antony tried, and twice more the crowd cheered the refusal. No wonder Caesar had looked angry. His stratagem had failed and he had come close to making a fool of himself. 
To Cassius and others of his mind, the intention behind the stratagem is obvious. Caesar wanted to be king and if the trick today had failed, another tomorrow might not-and this must be stopped at all costs. 


Ö foamed at mouth. ..




Caesar's anger and disappointment are described most graphically by Casca. He relates that after the third refusal, Caesar: 


Ö fell down in the market place, and foamed at mouth,

and was speechless.





óAct I, scene ii, lines 252-53 


In short, he had had an epileptic fit. The tale that Caesar was an epileptic may not be a reliable one, however. The Roman historian Gaius Suetonius Tranquillus wrote a scandal-filled set of biographies of the early Roman emperors a century and a half after Caesar's time, and he said that Caesar had twice had "the falling sickness" in the time of battle. It is always doubtful how far one can believe Suetonius, however. 
Shakespeare has Casca make another notable comment, meant literally, which has become a very byword in the language. Asked if Cicero said anything, he answered that Cicero had spoken in Greek: 


Ö those that understood him smiled at one another

and shook their heads; but for mine own part, it was

Greek to me.




óAct I, scene ii, lines 282-84 


Ö put to silence Casca then says:

/ could tell you more news too :

Marullus and Flavius, for pulling scarfs off

Caesar's images, are put to silence.





óAct I, scene ii, lines 284-86 


Marullus and Flavius are the tribunes of the first scene and this seems to hark back to their activities at the Spanish triumph months before. Actually, their activities then are purely Shakespearean and have no source in history. 
Plutarch associates them, rather, with the incident at the Lupercalian festival. After the refusal of the diadem, someone apparently placed it on the head of a statue of Caesar, as though he were still trying to fire the Roman populace with enthusiasm for Caesar as king. One of the tribunes plucked it off and the people cheered him, and that is the germ for Shakespeare's first scene. 
Shakespeare says the tribunes were "put to silence," which sounds almost as though they were executed. Plutarch, however, merely says they were turned out of their office. 


Ö he loves Brutus




Casca leaves, and then Brutus. Cassius is left alone to smile grimly and remark in soliloquy at how easy Brutus is to handle: 


Well, Brutus, thou art noble; yet I see

Thy honorable mettle may be wrought

From that it is disposedÖ





óAct I, scene ii, lines 308-10 


Brutus is constantly being called honorable and noble throughout the play, yet he never seems so in action. Not only is he vain and envious, but he is rather stupid too. Cassius plans to throw letters into Brutus' window, disguised in various hands, all praising him and calling him to save the state. He is certain that Brutus' colossal vanity and less than colossal intelligence will make this rather childish stratagem a success. 
Why should Cassius want such a vain fool as Brutus on his side? Can Brutus be trusted not to ruin any conspiracy of which he forms a part? (Actually, no, for his vain folly ruins this one, as Shakespeare makes amply clear.) Cassius gives the answer in his soliloquy:


Caesar doth bear me hard, but he loves Brutus.





óAct I, scene ii, line 313 


Later historians emphasized Caesar's partiality toward Brutus since it made succeeding events all the more dramatic. On the other hand, there is one instance which seems to show Caesar's feeling in terms of hard action. 
When Caesar first returned in triumph to Rome, Cassius and Brutus both asked for the post of praetor of the city (an office rather like the modern mayor). Caesar granted the post to Brutus, though he is supposed to have admitted that Cassius was the more fit for it. 
Caesar's surprising partiality for Brutus and the fact that he was supposed to have once been friendly with Brutus' mother gave rise to the scandalous tale that Brutus was an illegitimate son of Caesar's. However, scandalmongers, then as now, prefer a dramatic guess to a sober fact, and we need not take this very seriously. 
However, one can see that Cassius values Brutus partly because through Brutus conspirators may probe Caesar's inner defenses more easily. 


Ö to the Capitol tomorrow




Between the second and third scenes another month passes, unmarked by the onrushing action of the play. Casca meets with Cicero in the third scene. Casca looks wild and, on Cicero's question, Casca tells of numerous supernatural events he has just witnessed. Cicero seems unmoved. He dismisses the tale and asks, practically: 


Comes Caesar to the Capitol tomorrow?





óAct I, scene iii, line 36 


It is, in other words, the night before the ides of March. It is March 14 and Caesar has called the Senate into session for the next day for some matter of great moment. 
Caesar was planning to head eastward with an army to make war on the Parthians, who had destroyed Crassus and most of his army nine years before-a Roman defeat that had as yet gone unavenged. Before Caesar could leave, certain matters had to be cleared up. 
One possibility is that Caesar did not want to leave Rome without settling the question of kingship, and that he was calling the Senate into session in order to force them to offer him the crown. 
Was this so? Would he really accept a grudged title, then depart from Rome for perhaps an extended period, leaving the city to almost certain war? Might it not be that he was merely calling the Senate into session for a formal declaration of war against the Parthians and for the establishmerit of a kind of "regency" to govern Rome while he was gone? Who can tell now. 
The conspirators, however, thought they knew what Caesar planned. They were sure that Caesar was going to make the irrevocable grab for the crown and that there was only one last chance to stop him-before the Senate actually had a chance to meet. 
Because they thought so, the next day, March 15, 44 b.c., was to be a key date in world history, and later legend got busy to fill the night before with supernatural portents. It is those legends which Shakespeare incorporates into his play. 
Our own materialist age has no difficulty whatever in rejecting out of hand any tales of supernatural occurrences on the night of March 14-15. We can dismiss them even in terms of the Romans themselves. If the eve of the ides had really been so riddled with horror, the conspirators would probably have been cowed from their project by superstition. 


Ö save here in Italy




Cicero leaves and Cassius enters. He too is full of the prodigies of the night and he begins to sound out Casca's feelings with regard to Caesar. Casca passes on one rumor as to Caesar's plans for the next day: 


Indeed, they say the senators tomorrow

Mean to establish Caesar as a king;

And he shall wear his crown by sea and land,

In every place save here in Italy.





óAct I, scene iii, lines 85-88 


Was this Caesar's intention? It seems, on the surface, a reasonable compromise. Italy at that time still ruled the Roman realm, and it was the Italians alone who were Roman citizens, and it was Roman citizens alone who had the traditional objection to monarchy. The provinces outside Italy lacked the Roman tradition and many of them were, in fact, accustomed to kings. They would accept a King Julius without objection and Italy would continue under Dictator Julius. 
It would, however, be a useless compromise as it stood. The permanence of monarchy would exist only in the provinces, which were without military power, while in Italy itself, where lay the control of the armies, Caesar's death would still be the signal for civil war. 
What is more likely, if such a compromise were pushed through, is that it would be intended to be temporary. How long after Caesar became king elsewhere would it be before he were king in Italy as well? The Roman populace, accustomed to hearing of Caesar as king, would come to accept him as such. 
Unquestionably, those who opposed Caesar and his reforms would realize this, so that any offer to renounce kingship for Italy only would be completely unsatisfactory. The mere thought of it drives Casca to agree to join the conspiracy Cassius is forming. 


'Tis CinnaÖ




Another enters. Casca is at once cautious (he is dealing in a dangerous plot which, if it fails, means death). Cassius reassures him: 


Tis Cinna;I do know him by his gait;

He is a friend.





óAct I, scene iii, lines 132-33 


It is Lucius Cornelius Cinna. His father, with the same name, had also been the father of Caesar's first wife. The elder Cinna had been one of Rome's most radical politicians, and had striven against the senatorial government even to the point of leading a revolution. His troops mutinied against him, however, and killed him in 84 b.c. The younger Cinna, however, had now joined the conspiracy against Caesar and in behalf of the senatorial party. 
It is amazing how many of the conspirators were in one way or another beholden to Caesar-Brutus most of all. That is probably one reason why the conspiracy succeeded; Caesar considered them all friends. 


Ö Decius Brutus and TreboniusÖ




Other conspirators are mentioned. Cinna doesn't recognize Casca at first. He says: 


Ö Who's that? Metellus Cimber?





óAct I, scene iii, line 134 


Then, a little later, when Cassius prepares to have the entire group meet at a particular site, he asks: 


Is Decius Brutus and Trebonius there?





óAct I, scene iii, line 148 


Gaius Trebonius was of the aristocracy, like Caesar, but, again like Caesar, he took an active part in the reform movement and worked hard in the Senate on behalf of measures favored by Caesar. He served as a general under Caesar in the wars in Gaul and in 45 b.c. (just the year before) Trebonius served as consul, the chief magistrate of Rome, thanks to Caesar's influence. To be sure, the consul had little real power while Caesar was dictator, but it was a most honorable position. 
As for "Decius Brutus," the name is an error that Shakespeare made in following North's translation of Plutarch, where the same error is to be found. The correct name is Decimus Junius Brutus. He belonged to the same family as did Marcus Junius Brutus, who is the Brutus of this play. This second Brutus is referred to as "Decius" throughout the play and I will do so too, since that will conveniently prevent confusion between the two Brutuses. 
Decius was another one of Caesar's generals during the Gallic conquest. In fact, he commanded the fleet at one point, and after Caesar's victory he served as governor of Gaul for a couple of years. His relationship to Caesar was so close that the Dictator even named Decius as one of his heirs, in case no member of his own family survived him. 


Ö the noble Brutus. ..




Yet despite the importance of the individuals in the conspiracy, the need is felt for something more. Cinna says: 


O Cassius, if you could

But win the noble Brutus to our party-





óAct I, scene iii, lines 140-41 


Casca explains a little later: 


O, he sits high in all the people's hearts;

And that which would appear offense in us,

His countenance, like richest alchemy,

Will change to virtue and to worthiness.





óAct I, scene iii, lines 157-60 


There is another reason why Brutus is desired: to cast a respectable cloak over what otherwise might seem a heinous deed. 
But Cassius explains his scheme of deluding "noble" Brutus with fake messages and even has them help in distributing them.


Ö no personal cause.. .




The scene now shifts to Brutus' house. Brutus has been unable to sleep. He wishes to join the conspiracy, but what he needs is some high-sounding noble reason to do so. He can't admit to the world, or even to himself, that he is being driven to it by Cassius' skillful appeal to his own vanity. He says: 


/ know no personal cause to spurn at him,

But for the general. He would be crowned.

How that might change his nature, there's the question.





óAct II, scene i, lines 11-13 


That seems to be the key to the noble cause he seeks-how power might change Caesar. He decides he will 


Ö think him as a serpent's egg

Which hatched, would as his kind grow mischievous,

And kill him in the shell.




 -Act II, scene i, lines 32-34


What Brutus is now thinking of is a kind of preventive assassination. Caesar must be killed not because he is tyrannical but because he may grow tyrannical. 
There is appeal in this argument. Power does tend to corrupt, as history has amply proven, and it is tempting to reason that a tyrant is best removed before he has a chance to show that corruption. What if Adolf Hitler had been assassinated in 1932? 
And yet, it is a dangerous view. Once we accept the fact that assassination is justified to prevent tyranny rather than to punish it, who would be safe? What ruler could be sure of not being regarded by someone somewhere as being on the high road to tyranny, which he would reach someday? 


Ö Erebus itself Ö




Brutus has been receiving the faked letters Cassius has prepared for him and he has managed to talk himself into believing in the nobility of the enterprise. It is clear he intends to join the conspiracy and yet he is still uneasy about it. 
When the conspirators arrive at his house, cloaked in masks and darkness, he is aware of the intrinsic shame of conspiracy. He apostrophizes personified conspiracy and says it must assume a false front, for


Ö thy native semblance on,

Not Erebus itself were dim enough

To hide thee from prevention.





-Act II, scene i, lines 83-85 


In some of the more poetic tellings of the Greek myths, Erebus is pictured as the son of Chaos, the brother of Night, and the father of the Fates. There are no tales told of him, however, and in poetry he is merely, as here, used as the personification of darkness. (The word is also used, sometimes, to describe an underground region en route to Hades.) 


Ö what of Cicero.. .




The conspirators are now all together and Brutus is formally accepted among their ranks. Should still others be recruited? Cassius asks: 


But what of Cicero? Shall we sound him?

I think he will stand very strong with us.





óAct II, scene i, lines 141-42 


Cicero had a very high reputation in Rome in some ways. In an age of general corruption, Cicero was widely recognized as an honest man of high ideals. He was a true republican and favored republican institutions backed by an honest and upright Senate. He would certainly be opposed to Caesar as king. All agree at once, therefore, that Cicero would be an excellent addition. 
All but Brutus, that is, for he says: 


O name him not! Let us not break with [confide in] him;





óAct II, scene i, line 150 


According to Plutarch's tale, Cicero was not approached because it was felt he lacked the necessary resolution and might, in a pinch, betray the conspiracy. 
And, indeed, although he was personally upright, he was indeed a physical coward and could not, through most of his life, face actual danger without quailing. 
When that aristocratic hoodlum Clodius (see page I-261) set about harassing Cicero and attacking his retinue with his gang of toughs, Cicero was not the man to face him out. Cicero fled the country and satisfied himself with writing rather whining letters of complaint. When Clodius was finally killed by a rival gang leader, Milo, in 52 b.c., Cicero undertook to defend Milo but was scared into voicelessness by hostile crowds. 
Again, in the civil war between Pompey and Caesar, Cicero made a rather miserable spectacle of himself as he tried to keep from being ground to death between the two, and feared to commit himself too far and too dangerously in either direction. 
With this background, the conspirators would be justified in not wishing to risk their mutual safety to Cicero's courage. 
This, however, is not the view Shakespeare presents Brutus as holding. He has Brutus give as his reason: 


For he [Cicero] will never follow anything

That other men begin.





óAct II, scene i, lines 151-52 


Brutus objects to Cicero's vanity and to his penchant for insisting on leading an operation or refusing to join. It is indeed true that Cicero was terribly vain, but not more so than Brutus is portrayed to be in this play. 
Indeed, one can easily suspect that Brutus does not want Cicero because he does not want a rival; that it is Brutus himself whose vanity will never allow him to "follow anything that other men begin." 
He has just joined the conspiracy which other men have begun, to be sure, but he is already calmly taking over the decision-making power and dictating the direction of the conspiracy. Cassius proposes Cicero and Brutus vetoes it. This, in fact, continues throughout the play. Cassius is constantly making solid, practical suggestions, which Brutus as constantly vetoes. 


Ö sacrifices, but not butchersÖ




Almost at once Brutus forces a wrong decision on the conspirators, one that makes rum inevitable. 
Cassius suggests that Mark Antony be killed along with Caesar. This is a sensible view if we accept the notion of the assassination in the first place. In planning any attack, it is only practical to take into account the inevitable counterattack and take measures to blunt it. Even if Caesar is killed, Mark Antony, an experienced general who is popular with his troops, would have the ability and the will to strike back, if he is allowed to live. Why not kill him then to begin with? 
But Brutus says: 


Our course will seem too bloody, Caius Cassius,

To cut the head off and then hack the limbs,

Like wrath in death and envy afterwards;

For Antony is but a limb of Caesar.

Let's be sacrificers, but not butchers, Caius.





óAct II, scene i, lines 162-66 


Is this Brutus' nobility? If so, Shakespeare takes considerable pains to neutralize it in the assassination scene an act later, where the conspirators do act like butchers and Brutus urges them to it. 
Is it Brutus' obtuse stupidity? Perhaps, but even more so it is an example of how he, not Cicero, "will never follow anything that other men begin." 
Perhaps Brutus might himself have suggested taking care of Mark Antony along with Caesar, if only Cassius hadn't mentioned it first. Now, however, that Brutus is in the conspiracy he will lead it, and the one way to do that is to contradict any initiative on the part of the others. 
Cassius, uneasily appalled by Brutus' blindness, tries to argue against it. Cassius says of Mark Antony: 


Yet I fear him;

For in the ingrafted love he bears to CaesarÖ





óAct II, scene i, lines 183-84 


But Brutus won't even let him finish. Brutus has spoken, and that's that 


Ö Count the clock




At this point there is the sound of a clock striking, and Brutus says: 


Peace! Count the clock.





óAct II, scene i, line 192 


This is one of the more amusing anachronisms in Shakespeare, for there were no mechanical clocks in the modern sense in Caesar's time. The best that could be done was a water clock and they were not common, and did not strike. Striking clocks, run by falling weights, were inventions of medieval times. 
Indeed, the very same scene, at the beginning, shows Brutus speaking of time telling in a way far more appropriate to his period. He says then, peevishly, as he sleeplessly paces his bedroom: 


I cannot, by the progress of the stars,

Give guess how near to day.





óAct II, scene i, lines 2-3


Ö Cato's daughter






Some last arrangements are made. Decius volunteers to make certain that Caesar doesn't change his mind and that he does come to the Capitol.
There is talk of adding new conspirators and of the exact time of meeting. The conspirators then leave and Brutus is left alone. 
But not for long. His wife enters, and demands to know what is going on. Who are these men who came? Why is Brutus acting so strangely? She feels she has a right to know, for 


I grant I am a woman; but withal

A woman that Lord Brutus took to wife.

I grant I am a woman; but withal

A woman well reputed, Cato's daughter.





óAct II, scene i, lines 292-95 


Cato was the Pompeian leader referred to earlier, who led the anti-Caesar forces in Africa. His full name was Marcus Porcius Cato, and he is usually called "Cato the Younger," because his great-grandfather, another Marcus Porcius Cato (see page I-227), was also important in Roman history. Cato the Younger was a model of rigid virtue. He deliberately conducted his life along the lines of the stories that were told of the ancient Romans. 
Since he was always very ostentatious about his virtue, he annoyed other people; since he never made allowances for the human weaknesses of others, he angered them; and since he never compromised, he always went down to defeat in the end. 
Later generations, however, who didn't have to deal with him themselves, have greatly admired his stiff honesty and his unbending devotion to his principles. 
Cato, after the defeat of the anti-Caesarian forces in Africa at the Battle of Thapsus in 46 b.c., was penned up with the remnants of the army in the city of Utica (near modern Tunis). Rather than surrender, he killed himself, so that he is sometimes known to later historians as "Cato of Utica." (Meanwhile the "noble" Brutus, far from emulating his uncle's steadfastness, had switched to Caesar's side and was serving under him.) 
Cato had a daughter, Porcia, or "Portia" as the name appears in this play, who was thus Brutus' first cousin. The two had married in 46 b.c. and were thus married about two years at the time of the conspiracy. It was the second marriage for each. 


Ö a voluntary wound




Portia is an example of the idealized view of the Roman matron-almost repulsive in their high-minded patriotism, as in the case of Volumnia (see page I-225). Thus, Shakespeare follows an unpleasant story told by Plutarch and has Portia say:


/ have made strong proof of my constancy,

Giving myself a voluntary wound

Here in the thigh; can I bear that with patience,

And not my husband's secrets?





óAct II, scene i, lines 299-302 


According to Plutarch, she slashed her thigh with a razor, and then suffered a fever, presumably because the wound grew infected. She recovered and, showing Brutus the scar, said this indicated how well she could endure pain and ensured that even torture would wring no secrets out of her. 
Roman legend spoke frequently of the manner in which Romans could endure pain in a patriotic cause. There is the tale, for instance, of Gaius Mucius, who in the very early days of the Roman Republic was captured by the general of the army laying siege to Rome. Mucius had invaded the general's tent with the intention of assassinating him and now the general demanded, under threat of torture, information on Rome's internal condition. 
Mucius then deliberately placed his right hand in a nearby lamp flame and held it there till it was consumed, to indicate how little effect torture would have on him. Perhaps Portia's self-inflicted wound was inspired by the Mucius legend. And perhaps the tale concerning Portia is no more true than that concerning Mucius. 
If the matter of Portia's wound were true, then the fact that Brutus was unaware of a bad wound in his wife's thigh until she showed it to him gives us a surprising view of the nature of their marriage. 


Caius Ligarius Ö




Before Brutus can explain the situation to Portia, however, a new conspirator enters and she must leave. Brutus greets him: 


Caius Ligarius, that Metellus spake of.





óAct II, scene i, line 311 


Plutarch calls him Caius Ligarius, but he is named Quintus Ligarius in other places. In either case, he is a senator who supported Pompey and held out for him with Cato the Younger. He was taken prisoner after the Battle of Thapsus, but was pardoned by Caesar after he had been brought to trial, with Cicero as his defender. 
Ligarius would have joined the conspiracy sooner but he is sick. As soon as he hears of the details, however, he says:


By all the gods that Romans bow before,

1 here discard my sickness!





óAct II, scene i, lines 320-21 


This story too is from Plutarch, and it is another example of the kind of heroism Romans loved to find in their historical accounts. 
The heavens themselvesÖ 
That same night on which Casca has seen supernatural prodigies and Brutus has joined the conspiracy, Caesar himself has had a restless sleep. His wife, Calphurnia, has had nightmares. What's more, she has heard of the sights men have seen and she doesn't want Caesar to leave the house the next day, fearing that all these omens foretell evil to him. 
Caesar refuses to believe it, maintaining the omens are to the world generally and not to himself in particular. To which Calphurnia replies: 


When beggars die, there are no comets seen;

The heavens themselves blaze forth the death of princes.





óAct II, scene ii, lines 30-31 


The comets, appearing in the skies at irregular intervals, and, with then-tails, taking on a most unusual shape, were wildly held to presage unusual disasters. For anything else, their appearance is too infrequent. Similarly, the unusual portents of the night must apply to some unusual person. 
This makes sense provided astrology in general does. 
Caesar does not go so far as to scorn astrology, but he does scorn fear in a pair of famous lines: 


Cowards die many times before their deaths;

The valiant never taste of death but once.





óAct II, scene ii, lines 32-33 


Their minds may change






Nevertheless, Calphurnia continues to beg and eventually Caesar is sufficiently swayed to grant her her wish and to agree to send Mark Antony in his place. 
It is morning by now, however, and Decius comes to escort Caesar to the Capitol. The news that Caesar has changed his mind and will not come staggers him. Quickly, he reinterprets all the omens and hints the senators will laugh. Not only does he make use of the threat of ridicule, but he also says: 


Ö the Senate have concluded

To give this day a crown to mighty Caesar.

If you shall send them word you will not come,

Their minds may change.





óAct II, scene ii, lines 93-96 


This seems true enough. Caesar is trying to pull off a coup that runs counter to the deepest Roman prejudices and it was bound to be a near thing. He had failed, at the Lupercalian festival, to gain a crown by popular acclamation. If he now missed a chance to force the Senate to give him one, he would be giving his opponents a chance to mobilize their forces and the whole project might be ruined. The historic Caesar won many successes by striking when the iron was hot and it isn't likely that he would let such a crucial moment pass. 
Caesar changes his mind once again and makes the fateful decision to go. 


Ö Read it, great Caesar




Caesar's progress toward the Capitol is attended by further warnings, according to Plutarch's story, which Shakespeare follows. The soothsayer is there and Caesar tells him ironically that the ides of March are come (presumably implying that all is well). To which the soothsayer answers, portentously: 


Ay, Caesar, but not gone.





óAct III, scene i, line 2 


Another man, Artemidorus, attempts to give Caesar a warning. According to Plutarch, he was a Greek professor of rhetoric from whom a number of the conspirators had been taking lessons. (In those days, rhetoric, the art of oratory, was indispensable to a public career.) He had picked up knowledge of their plans, presumably because they spoke carelessly before him, and he was anxious to reveal those plans to Caesar (perhaps out of pro-Caesarian conviction or perhaps out of the hope of profiting by Caesar's gratitude). 
In any case, he passes a note of warning to Caesar, telling him of the plot. According to Plutarch, Caesar tried several times to read the note but was prevented from doing so by the press of people about him. Shakespeare makes it more dramatic, showing Caesar, by his arrogance, bringing his fate upon himself. 
Artemidorus, in an agony of Impatience, cries out, as other petitions are handed Caesar: 


O Caesar, read mine first; for mine's a suit

That touches Caesar nearer. Read it, great Caesar.





óAct III, scene i, lines 6-7 


But Caesar answers grandly: 


What touches us ourself should be last served.





óAct III, scene i, line 8 


And thus he condemns himself. 


Et tu, BruteÖ




In what follows, Shakespeare follows Plutarch very closely. The conspirators crowd around Caesar on the pretext that they are petitioning for the recall of the banished Publius Cimber, the brother of Metellus Cimber. Caesar refuses, in a fine oratorical display of unyieldingness, saying: 


Ö I am constant as the Northern Star

Of whose true-fixed and resting quality

There is no fellow in the firmament.




óAct III, scene i, lines 60-62 


The Northern Star (Polaris) does not itself move. Rather, all the other stars circle about it as a hub (in reflection, actually, of the earth's rotation about its axis, the northern end of which points nearly at Polaris). Caesar's picture of himself as the unchanging Northern Star about which all other men revolve is an example of what the Greeks called hubris ("overweening arrogance") and it is followed quickly by what the Greeks called ate ("retribution"). It is the biblical "Pride goeth beforeÖ a fall." 
The conspirators have now surrounded him so that the onlookers cannot see what is happening, as each approaches on pretense of adding his own pleas to the petition. When Brutus makes his plea, Caesar is embarrassed. The Dictator has repulsed Metellus Cimber haughtily but he cannot use similar language to the beloved Brutus. All he can say is an uneasy: 


What, Brutus?




óAct III, scene i, line 54 


Then, later, when Decius begins his plea, Caesar points out that he cannot do it even for Brutus, saying: 


Doth not Brutus bootless kneel?




óAct III, scene i, line 75 


At which point Casca strikes with his dagger, crying: 


Speak hands for me!




óAct III, scene i, line 76 


According to Plutarch, they each proceed to strike at Caesar, having made an agreement among themselves that each conspirator must be equally involved in the assassination. No one of them must be able to try to escape at the expense of the others by pleading he did not actually stab Caesar. 
Caesar tried vainly to avoid the blows until it was Brutus' turn. Brutus, according to Plutarch, struck him "in the privities." That was the last straw for Caesar. When Brutus lifted his weapon to strike, Caesar cried out, "Thou also, Brutus!" and attempted no further to avoid the strokes. His outcry, in Latin, was so famous that Shakespeare made no attempt to translate it, but kept it as it was, a small patch of Latin in the midst of the play: 


Et tu, Brute? Then fall Caesar.




óAct III, scene i, line 77 


Ö in Caesar's blood




So died Julius Caesar, on March 15, 44 b.c., hacked to death by twenty-three stabs. Brutus had earlier made an apparently noble speech to the effect that they not "hack the limbs" and that they "be sacrificers, but not butchers" (see page I-279). He had meant it figuratively with reference to the possible death of Mark Antony, but now that speech takes on a grislier aspect, when it turns out that Caesar has, deliberately, been hacked and butchered to death. 
Was Shakespeare sardonically contrasting Brutus' brutal acts with his "noble" words? What should we think? Perhaps Brutus merely went along with the general feeling of the conspirators that the assassination be carried out by universal hacking. This seems doubtful since in every other case in the play he insists on having his own way even though the consensus is against him. Then too, Shakespeare has Brutus go on to say:


Stoop, Romans, stoop,

And let us bathe our hands in Caesar's blood

Up to the elbows, and besmear our swords.

Then walk we forth, even to the market place,

And waving our red weapons o'er our heads,

Let's all cry "Peace, freedom, and liberty!"




óAct III, scene i, lines 105-10 


Plutarch merely says the swords were bloodied, but Shakespeare has Brutus suggest that they deliberately bloody their arms. Does this not give them all the precise appearance of butchers? Does this not deliberately belie Brutus' plea to "be sacrificers, but not butchers"? 
It is precisely as butchers that Brutus would have them all go out to the market place; that is, the forum. The Latin word forum means "market place." It was located in the valley between the Capitoline and Palatine hills, the first two hills to be occupied by the city. The market place is a natural site for people to gather, trade news, and discuss business, so that the word "forum" has now come to mean any public place for the discussion of ideas. 


Ö on Pompey's basisÖ




When Cassius foretells grimly that this scene will be re-enacted in tragedies through future centuries, the "noble" Brutus evinces no sorrow. Rather, he lends himself to this lugubrious fantasy and says: 


How many times shall

Caesar bleed in sport,

That now on Pompey's basis lies along

No worthier than the dust!





óAct III, scene i, lines 114-16 


The reference to "Pompey's basis" is to the pedestal of the statue of Pompey that stood at the Capitol. The statues and trophies of Pompey which had come to grace the Capitol in the time of Pompey's greatness had been taken away in the aftermath of Caesar's victory at Pharsalia by those in Rome who thought to ingratiate themselves with the victor in this way. Caesar, on his return, ordered them replaced, forgiving the memory of Pompey even as he had forgiven so many of Pompey's followers. 
And yet not only was he assassinated by those he had forgiven, but in death he was dragged by them (probably deliberately) to the base of Pompey's statue in order that he might lie there a symbolic victim at the feet of the man he had defeated.


Ö no harm intendedÖ




At the realization that Caesar was dead, the Capitol emptied itself of the panicked spectators. Who knew, after all, how broad and general the plot was and how many were marked for death? 
It was necessary, therefore, for the conspirators to calm the city at once lest a panicked populace, once it regained its breath, break out in uncontrollable rioting of which no one could foresee the end. One senator, Publius, too old and infirm to fly with the rest, remains on the scene terrified. He is accosted gently and sent with a message. Brutus says: 


Publius, good cheer;

There is no harm intended to your person,

Nor to Roman else. So tell them, Publius.





óAct III, scene i, lines 89-91 


Ö to lie in death




Mark Antony is a special case. He knew that if the plot extended to even one person beyond Caesar himself, he would be the one. So far he had been spared; he had even been taken aside at the time of the assassination. It was necessary now for him to play for time and gain, temporarily, the friendship of the conspirators, or at least allay their suspicions. 
In Shakespeare's version, Mark Antony sends a messenger to Brutus with a most humble message: 


// Brutus will vouchsafe that Antony

May safely come to him and be resolved

How Caesar hath deserved to lie in death,

Mark Antony shall not love Caesar dead

So well as Brutus living; but will follow

The fortunes and affairs of noble Brutus

Through the hazards of this untrod state

With all true faith.





óAct III, scene i, lines 130-37 


It is a careful speech, appealing to Brutus' vanity and giving him the necessary adjective "noble." Mark Antony tempts Brutus with the picture of himself taking the place of Caesar, while Mark Antony continues as loyal assistant. It would seem that Antony judges Brutus to be not so much interested in stopping Caesar as in replacing him, and perhaps he is right. 
Nor is Mark Antony a complete hypocrite. The message does not promise unqualified submission to Brutus. It sets a condition. Brutus must arrange to have Mark Antony "be resolved" as to the justice of the assassination; that is, to have it explained to his satisfaction. 
Of course, Mark Antony has no intention of allowing the assassination to be explained to his satisfaction, but Brutus cannot see that. The unimaginably vain Brutus feels the assassination to be necessary; how then can anyone else doubt that necessity once Brutus explains it? 


Your voice shall be as strongÖ




Brutus is won over at once, as he always is by praise, but Cassius is not. He says: 


But yet have I a mind

That fears him muchÖ





óAct III, scene i, lines 144-45 


Brutus, with his usual misjudgment, brushes that aside and welcomes Mark Antony, who now comes onstage with a most magnificent piece of bluffing. He speaks in love and praise of Caesar, and grandly suggests that if they mean to kill him, now is the time to do it, in the same spot and with the same weapons that killed Caesar. Yet he is careful to join the offer with flattery: 


No place will please me so, no mean of death,

As here by Caesar, and by you cut off,

The choice and master spirits of this age.





óAct III, scene i, lines 161-63 


The flattery further melts the susceptible Brutus, of course, and he offers conciliatory words to Mark Antony. The practical Cassius realizes that Brutus is all wrong and feels the best move now is to inveigle Mark Antony into sharing the guilt by offering to cut him in on the loot. He says: 


Your voice shall be as strong as any man's

In the disposing of new dignities.





óAct III, scene i, lines 177-78 


Ö what compactÖ




Mark Antony makes no direct reply to the offer of loot, but proceeds to strike those attitudes of nobility he knows will impress Brutus. He ostentatiously shakes the bloody hands of the conspirators yet speaks eloquently of his love for Caesar, once Brutus professes that he himself had loved Caesar. 
Cassius, rather desperately, breaks into the flow of rhetoric with a practical question to Mark Antony: 


But what compact mean you to have with us?

Will you be pricked in number of our friends,

Or shall we on, and not depend on you?





óAct III, scene i, lines 215-17 


Where we write names with chalk on slate, or with pen and pencil on paper, the Romans were apt to scratch them in the wax coated on a wooden tablet. Where we check off names with a /, they would prick a little hole next to the name. Hence the question "Will you be pricked in number of our friendsÖ" 


Ö do not consent Ö




Again, Mark Antony evades a direct commitment. He still wants an explanation of Caesar's crimes, which Brutus is still confident he can give. What's more, Antony adds a casual request: 


Ö that / may

Produce his [Caesar's] body to the market place,

And in the pulpit, as becomes a friend,

Speak in the order of his funeral.





óAct III, scene i, lines 227-30 


It seems a moderate request. After all, Caesar, though assassinated, deserves an honorable funeral and a eulogy by a good friend; especially a friend who seems to have joined the conspiracy. Brutus agrees at once. 
The clear-seeing Cassius is horrified. He pulls Brutus aside and whispers urgently: 


You know not what you do; do not consent

That Antony speak in his funeral.





óAct III, scene i, lines 232-33 


Cassius knows, after all, that Mark Antony is a skillful orator and that if he catches the attention of the populace he can become dangerous. 
Nothing, however, can win out over Brutus' vanity. It is the mainspring of all the action. Brutus points out that he will speak first and explain the assassination (he is always sure that he has but to explain the deed and everyone will understand and be satisfied) and that Mark Antony can, after that, do nothing. To make doubly sure, Brutus sets conditions, saying to Antony: 


You shall not in your funeral speech blame us,

But speak all good you can devise of Caesar

And say you do't by our permission;





óAct III, scene i, lines 245-48 


Brutus was worse than vain; he was a fool to think that such conditions could for one moment stop an accomplished orator and force him to make the conspirators seem noble and magnanimous. Later on, when Mark Antony does speak, he keeps to those conditions rigorously, and it does the conspirators no good at all. 


Ö Caesar's spiritÖ




Mark Antony is left alone with Caesar's body and, in an emotional soliloquy, apologizes to the corpse for his show of affection with the conspirators. He predicts the coming of civil war and says: 


And Caesar's spirit, ranging for revenge,

With Ate by his side come hot from hell,

Shall in these confines with a monarch's voice

Cry "Havoc," and let slip the dogs of war,





óAct III, scene i, lines 270-73 


Ate is visualized here as the personified goddess of retribution, and "Havoc" is the fearful cry that sounds out at the final fall of a besieged city. It is the signal for unrestrained killing and looting when all real fighting is done. (The word "hawk" is from the same root and one can see in the swoop of the hawk the symbol of the surge of a conquering army on its helpless victims.) 
The reference to "Caesar's spirit" may be taken literally in any society that believes in ghosts, and these include both Mark Antony's and Shakespeare's. Indeed, Caesar's spirit makes an actual appearance in Plutarch's tale and therefore in this play as well. 


Ö Octavius CaesarÖ




It is but a small leap, however, to interpret "Caesar's spirit" in another way too. His spirit may be the spirit of his reforms and his attempt to reorganize the Roman government under a strong and centralized rule. This could live on and come "ranging for revenge." And that spirit might well be embodied in another man. 
As though to indicate this, Antony's soliloquy is followed by the immediate entrance of a "Servant"; a messenger coming to announce his master is on his way. It follows only six lines after the reference to "Caesar's spirit" and Mark Antony recognizes the newcomer, saying: 


You serve Octavius Caesar, do you not?





óAct III, scene i, line 276 


Octavius Caesar, whose proper name is Caius Octavius, is the only living close relative of Julius Caesar. He is the grandson of Caesar's sister, Julia, and is therefore the grandnephew of Julius. He was born in 63 b.c. and was nineteen years old at the time of the assassination. 
Octavius was a sickly youth. He had joined Caesar in Spain (just before the opening of the play) but he was obviously unsuited for war. Nor was his greatuncle anxious to push him into warfare. In default of living children of his own, the Dictator needed Octavius as an heir. Therefore, when Caesar was making ready to move east against Parthia, he ordered the boy to remain in Greece at his studies. 
Octavius was still in Greece when news of the assassination reached him, and at once he decided to make for Rome, there to demand what he could of his great uncle's inheritance. 
Antony does not welcome the news of the coming of Octavius. He may have loved Julius Caesar, but that does not require him to love Caesar's grandnephew. After all, Antony could reasonably argue that he, as Caesar's loyal lieutenant and a mature man of war, is more realistically Caesar's heir than some sickly child who happens to be related to Caesar by accident of birth. The presence of the boy would merely produce complications and Antony does his best to keep him away. He sends back a message: 


Here is a mourning Rome, a dangerous Rome,

No Rome of safety for Octavius yet.





óAct III, scene i, lines 288-89 


Ö I loved Rome more




The next scene moves directly to Caesar's funeral. Actually, it took place on March 20 and the five days between assassination and funeral were busy ones. The conspirators had hurriedly taken hold of the spoils. Many of them have had provinces assigned to them: Brutus will govern Macedonia; Cassius will take over Syria; Decius will have Cisalpine Gaul; Trebonius, part of Asia Minor; Metellus Cimber, another part of Asia Minor; and so on. 
For men supposedly actuated only by a noble concern for the commonwealth, they were extraordinarily quick to place themselves in positions of power. Nor was Brutus behindhand in taking his share. 
But Shakespeare ignores this and proceeds directly to the funeral. 
Brutus begins by addressing a hostile crowd in the forum, offering to explain the circumstances of the assassination. He does so in prose; stilted prose, at that, with laboriously balanced sentences. He insists he loved Caesar and killed him only for the greater good of Rome: 


Not that I loved Caesar less,

but that I loved Rome more.





óAct III, scene ii, lines 21-22 


The essence of his defense is that Caesar had grown too ambitious for Rome's safety; that is, Caesar was ambitious to be king. Brutus says (and here he is almost convincing): 


As Caesar loved me,

I weep for him; as he was fortunate,

I rejoice at it; as he was valiant,

1 honor him; but as he was ambitious,

I slew him.





óAct III, scene ii, lines 24-27 


Brutus then prepares to keep his promise of letting Mark Antony speak on behalf of Caesar. With fatuous vanity, he urges the crowd to listen to Antony and himself hurries away as though he is convinced that he has so turned the crowd against Caesar and toward himself that nothing Mark Antony can say will undo matters. 


Ö Brutus is an honorable man




Now Mark Antony is there with Caesar's corpse. Quietly, he begins one of the most famous passages Shakespeare has ever written. (Whatever Antony said in reality-and it must have been effective, for he gained Rome thereby-it is hard to believe that he could possibly have scaled the heights Shakespeare wrote for him.) He begins: 


Friends, Romans, countrymen, lend me your ears;

I come to bury Caesar, not to praise him.





óAct III, scene ii, lines 75-76 


He admits that if (if) Caesar were ambitious, that was a bad fault and he has certainly been punished for it. As he promised Brutus, he explains that he speaks by permission of the conspirators and he does nothing but praise them: 


Here, under leave of Brutus and the rest

(For Brutus is an honorable man,

So are they all, all honorable men),

Come 1 to speak in Caesar's funeral.





óAct III, scene ii, lines 83-86 


The phrase "Brutus is an honorable man" is to be repeated and repeated by Mark Antony. He gives the praise to Brutus in precisely the fashion Brutus most enjoys, crying out how honorable and noble he is. Yet the skillful repetition, in rising tones of irony, builds the anger of the crowd to the point where the very epithet "honorable" becomes an insult. 
Speaking in short and moving phrases, as though he were choked with emotion, Mark Antony disposes of the charge of ambition: 


He was my friend, faithful and just to me;

But Brutus says he was ambitious.

And Brutus is an honorable man.

He hath brought many captives home to Rome,

Whose ransoms did the general coffers fill;

Did this in Caesar seem ambitious?

When that the poor have cried, Caesar hath wept;

Ambition should be made of sterner stuff.

Yet Brutus says he was ambitious;

And Brutus is an honorable man.

You all did see that on the Lupercal

I thrice presented him a kingly crown,

Which he did thrice refuse. Was this ambition?

Yet Brutus says he was ambitious;

And sure he is an honorable man.





óAct III, scene ii, lines 87-101 


Antony's arguments are, of course, irrelevant. By "ambition," Brutus meant Caesar's desire to be king, and nothing Antony says disproves that desire. Caesar might be a good personal friend, yet plan to be a king. He might donate ransom money to the public treasury and express pity for the poor, but intend these acts only to build up the good will with which to buy the crown. If he did refuse the crown, it was only to force the mob to insist he take it, and he regretted the failure of the scheme.
But all that, of course, doesn't matter. Antony's speech is almost hypnotic in its force, and, properly presented, it can win over a modern audience which had earlier been prepared to sympathize with Brutus. 


Ö 'tis his will




The crowd is indeed moved and Mark Antony senses that without difficulty. It is time for the next step, to appeal directly and forcefully to the powerful emotion of greed. He says: 


But here's a parchment with the seal of Caesar;

I found it in his closet; 'tis his will.

Let but the commons hear this testament,

Which, pardon me, I do not mean to read,

And they would go and kiss dead Caesar's wounds,





óAct III, scene ii, lines 130-34 


Yes indeed, Antony has not been idle in the interval between assassination and funeral either. The very night following the assassination, having made a temporary peace with the conspirators, he took a crucial action. He seized the funds which Caesar had gathered for his projected Parthian campaign and persuaded Calphurnia to let him have access to all of Caesar's papers, among which he found the will. 
The funds would be important when it came to bribing senators and hiring soldiers. The will-well, that would be used now. 
Naturally, once Antony mentions the will and declines to read it, the crowd howls for it to be read. Antony hangs back and the more he does so, the more violently insistent the crowd becomes. Choosing his moment with artistic care, Antony advances his reason for hesitating: 


/ fear I wrong the honorable men

Whose daggers have stabbed Caesar; I do fear it.





óAct III, scene ii, lines 153-54 


And one man in the crowd calls out with passion: 


They were traitors. Honorable men!





óAct III, scene ii, line 155 


There is hatred in the repetition of that phrase so often applied to Brutus, and which Brutus so loves. Another man in the crowd cries out. 


They were villains, murderers!

The will! Read the will!





óAct III, scene ii, lines 157-58 


Ö the Nervii




Mark Antony has them now, but it is still not enough. He intends to make them virtually insane with rage. He descends from the rostrum and has them gather round Caesar's corpse. Antony holds up the cloak Caesar was wearing when he was killed: 


You all do know this mantle; I remember

The first time ever Caesar put it on:

'Twas on a summer's evening, in his tent,

That day he overcame the Nervii.





óAct III, scene ii, lines 172-75 


The Nervii were a fierce Gallic tribe living in what is now Belgium, and Caesar had beaten them in 57 b.c. This was a skillful allusion, too, for it reminded the crowd of Caesar's conquests, not over Romans, but over barbarian Gauls (whom Romans particularly hated because of the memory of the ancient Gallic sack of Rome in 390 b.c.). 
To be sure, this passage doesn't square with actual history. Mark Antony couldn't possibly remember the evening of the day on which Caesar overcame the Nervii, since he didn't join Caesar in Gaul till three years later. Moreover, is it likely that Caesar on the supreme day on which he expects to be crowned king will put on a thirteen-year-old cloak? All our information concerning him agrees that he was a dandy, and meticulous with his grooming. 
However, it is an effective passage and the real Mark Antony would have used it, regardless of accuracy, if he had thought of it 


Ö the most unkindest cut of all




Now Mark Antony begins to point to the bloodied rents in the mantle where swords had sliced through (and this he actually did, according to Plutarch). What's more, he has progressed to the point where he can begin to stab the conspirators with pointed words. 


Look, in this place ran Cassius" dagger through;

See what a rent the envious Casca made;

Through this the well-beloved Brutus stabbed,





óAct III, scene ii, lines 176-78 


Antony lingers on Brutus' stroke, for it was this man who had instructed him to praise the conspirators, and it is Brutus therefore whom he chiefly wants to destroy with praise. He says:


Ö Brutus, as you know, was Caesar's angel. Judge,

O you gods, how dearly Caesar loved him!

This was the most unkindest cut of all;




óAct III, scene ii, lines 183-85 


Now he whips away the cloak to reveal Caesar's own gashed body, and that is the equivalent of crying "Havoc," for the maddened crowd breaks out with: 


Revenge! About! Seek! Burn! Fire!

Kill! Slay! Let not a traitor live!




óAct III, scene ii, lines 206-7 


Ö When comes such another




But still Mark Antony is not through. He calms them yet again, still keeping to his promise to praise Brutus, by saying: 


/ am no orator, as Brutus is;

But (as you know me all) a plain blunt man




óAct HI, scene ii, lines 219-20 


It is a piece of praise that openly laughs at Brutus, and there is still, after all, the will to read. Antony begins the reading and says: 


To every Roman citizen he gives,

To every several man, seventy-five drachmas.




óAct III, scene ii, lines 243-44 


There is more: 


Moreover, he hath left you all his walks,

His private arbors, and new-planted orchards,

On this side Tiber; he hath left them you,

And to your heirs forever; common pleasures,

To walk abroad and recreate yourselves.




óAct III, scene ii, lines 249-53 


That brings Antony to his climax. He has wrought on the crowd with pity, with greed, and with gratitude, and they are in the highest state combustible. He gives them one last shout: 


Here was a Caesar! When comes such another?




óAct III, scene ii, line 254 


With that, the crowd explodes. They are utterly mad and ready to destroy the conspirators and Rome with them if necessary. Mark Antony watches them rush off, raving, and says grimly: 


Now let it work; Mischief, thou art afoot,

Take though what course thou wilt.





óAct III, scene ii, lines 263-64 


Ö his name's Cinna




Shakespeare shows the mob at its frightening work in one incident taken from Plutarch, which involves a minor poet named Helvius Cinna. He was a friend of Caesar's and no relative of Lucius Cornelius Cinna, the conspirator. 
Cinna the poet is stopped by elements of the mob who demand he identify himself. He says: 


Truly, my name is Cinna.





óAct III, scene iii, line 27 


The crowd at once sets up its howl and though the poor fellow shrieks that he is not Cinna the conspirator but merely China the poet, they will not listen, crying: 


It is no matter, his name's Cinna;





óAct III, scene iii, line 33 


Ö rid like madmenÖ




Soon enough, the conspirators realize the two deadly mistakes Brutus has made for them; letting Antony live, and letting him speak. The mere name of "conspirator" is now enough to kill. 
The servant who had appeared in the earlier scene to talk of Octavius appears soon after the conclusion of Antony's great speech to announce: 


Ö Brutus and Cassius

Are rid like madmen through the gates of Rome.





óAct III, scene ii, lines 271-72 


They hoped at first merely to retire to some nearby town till Rome had cooled down, and then to return. This was not to happen, however. Rome did not cool down; Mark Antony remained in control. The conspirators scattered, some to the respective provinces they had been assigned, some elsewhere. Brutus and Cassius are the only conspirators with whom the play concerns itself in the last two acts. They retire to the eastern provinces. 


Ö Octavius is already come Ö




But Mark Antony was not to have it all his own way. He had no way of knowing it, but the day of his funeral speech was the climax of his life, the apex of his power. He had ended it with the rhetorical cry: "Here was a Caesar! When comes such another?" and eleven lines later that question is answered. 
The servant who brings the news of the flight of Brutus and Cassius also announces news concerning his master: 


Sir, Octavius is already come to Rome.




óAct III, scene ii, line 265 


Here was another Caesar. He was that literally, for he adopted the name; and he was that figuratively too, for he was even more capable than Julius, winning that for which the older man had died without getting. 
There was no way of telling this when Octavius first came; young, sickly, and seeming to be of little account in comparison to the great, magnetic charisma that now clung to Mark Antony. Antony underestimated him (everyone did) and could not tell that, as he himself had been Brutus' nemesis, so Octavius was fated to be his-something that will be made clear enough in Shakespeare's Antony and Cleopatra. 
But even without foreseeing the future, Antony can see that Octavius' coming is a serious embarrassment. Caesar's will, which Antony had read with such consummate skill at the funeral, contained clauses he tried to suppress. Caesar, in his will, had named Octavius as his heir and, what's more, had adopted him as his son. This meant that Octavius owned all of Caesar's funds (which Mark Antony had appropriated) and would have become the next king if Caesar had lived long enough to gain the monarchy. 
Mark Antony wanted the will ratified and had persuaded the Senate to do so by agreeing to allow them also to declare an amnesty for the conspirators. However, Antony fought against the ratification by the Senate of that part of the will that dealt with Octavius. Just the same, Gaius Octavius changed his name to Gaius Julius Caesar Octavianus, to indicate his new status as Caesar's adopted son, and is thereafter known to English-speaking historians as Octavian. In this play, however, he remains "Octavius" throughout and I will call him so. 
The change in name was a shrewd move. It enabled him to call himself "Caesar" and capitalize on the magic of that name. What's more, Cicero rallied to him, out of hatred for Mark Antony, and Cicero's oratory was a tower of strength. 


He and LepidusÖ




There was also the question of the army. In the play, when Mark Antony hears Octavius is in Rome, he asks his whereabouts and is told: 


He and Lepidus are at Caesar's house.




óAct III, scene ii, line 267 


The reference is to a Roman general, Marcus Aemilius Lepidus. On the day of the assassination, he just happened to have a legion of troops on the outskirts of the city. He was preparing to move with them to his province in southern Gaul, but when the news of the assassination came, he occupied Rome instead. If he had been a strong character, this accident of being on the scene at the crucial moment might have made him master of the Roman realm. 
Lepidus was, however, a weakling. He lacked Octavius' name, Antony's reputation, and the resolution of both. In later years he remained a pawn. 


Ö to Octavius




Antony, hearing that Octavius is in Rome and with Lepidus, doesn't hesitate. He says to the Servant: 


Bring me to Octavius.




óAct III, scene ii, line 274 


The short mob scene involving China the poet intervenes and the fourth act then opens with Antony, Octavius, and Lepidus in triple conference. As far as the play is concerned, little time has elapsed. 
In actual history, however, more than a year and a half of intensive political and military jockeying has intervened between the funeral of Caesar and the three-way meeting of Antony, Octavius, and Lepidus. 
After the funeral, Antony found himself in annoying difficulties. He was not the politician Caesar had been and he found Octavius a curiously capable enemy for the sickly youngster he seemed to be. What's more, Cicero now rose to new prominence and his oratory flamed to new heights. Cicero's hatred for Mark Antony showed itself in a succession of unbelievably vituperative speeches that wrecked Antony's popularity almost as much as Antony's funeral speech had wrecked Brutus'. 
Antony felt he could best regain lost ground by military victory. Decius (Decimus Brutus) was in control of Cisalpine Gaul and he was the closest of the conspirators. Antony turned against him, despite the senatorial amnesty of the conspirators, and thus began a new civil war. 
As soon as Antony had marched out of Rome at the head of his troops, however, Octavius persuaded the Senate to declare him a public enemy. With senatorial backing gone, Mark Antony could not make head against Decius, but was forced, in April 43 b.c. (a full year after the assassination), to march his army into Gaul. He had failed militarily as well as politically. 
Octavius, master of Rome, now forced the Senate to recognize him at last as heir to Caesar. In September 43 b.c. he himself led an army against Decius. Octavius was no fighter, but the name of Caesar succeeded where Antony had failed. Decius' soldiers deserted in droves, and Decius himself had to flee. He was captured and executed and Octavius' reputation skyrocketed. 
By that time, though, Brutus and Cassius had consolidated their power over the eastern half of the Roman realm. It was clear that if Antony and Octavius continued to maneuver against each other, they would both lose and the conspirators would yet emerge in control. 
Lepidus therefore labored to bring Antony and Octavius together in a compromise settlement, and succeeded. All three met in Bononia (the modern Bologna) on November 27, 43 b.c., twenty months after the assassination. 
The three agreed to combine in a three-man government, an agreement resembling the one that had been made by Caesar, Pompey, and Crassus seventeen years before. In fact, the new agreement is called the Second Triumvirate. The fourth act opens after the Second Triumvirate has been formed. 


Ö with a spotÖ




Shakespeare presents the Triumvirate at the moment they make a grisly bargain to seal their compact. 
What they chiefly need, after all, is money. One way of obtaining it is to declare certain well-to-do Individuals guilty of treason, execute them, and confiscate their estates. This also gives each triumvir a chance to get rid of personal enemies as well. The enemy of one, however, might be the friend or relative of another member of the Triumvirate; and if one of them sacrifices a friend or relative he would naturally expect the other two to make a similar sacrifice.
The proscriptions (that is, arbitrary condemnations) include, for instance, Lepidus' brother. As quid pro quo, Antony must allow his nephew to be marked with a prick in the wax (see page I-290), indicating he is listed for execution. Antony says, with a kind of gruesome magnanimity: 


He shall not live; look, with a spot I damn him.





óAct IV, scene i, line 6 


What Mark Antony demands (something that does not appear in the play at this point) and Octavius is forced to concede, is Cicero's life. Cicero had labored for Octavius and had made all the difference when the young man had first come to Rome as an almost ignored young man, and now Octavius, grown to power, delivers the great orator to his enemy. However much we might excuse it as practical politics, however much we might argue that Octavius had no choice, it remains the blackest single act of Octavius' long and illustrious career. 


Are levying powers. ..




With the immediate financial problem ironed out by means of the proscriptions, the Triumvirate can turn to military matters. Antony says: 


And now, Octavius,

Listen great things. Brutus and Cassius

Are levying powers; we must straight make head.





óAct IV, scene i, lines 40-42 


The united Caesarians must face the united conspirators. Brutus had been in Macedonia for a year now and Cassius in Syria. In the face of the gathering of their enemies, they were getting armies ready for battle and planning to unite their forces. 


Ö this night in SardisÖ




At once the action moves to the conspirators, who are meeting each other in Asia Minor, and for the first tune the setting of the play is outside the city of Rome. 
The scene is laid in the camp of Brutus' army outside Sardis, and one of Brutus' aides, Lucilius, tells him with reference to Cassius' approaching army: 


They mean this night in Sardis to be quartered;





óAct IV, scene ii, line 28


Sardis is a city in western Asia Minor, forty-five miles east of the Aegean Sea. In ancient times it was the capital of the Lydian monarchy, which reached its height under Croesus, who reigned there from 560 to 546 b.c. The wealth of Sardis and the kingdom of Lydia at that time was such that the Greeks used to say "as rich as Croesus," a phrase that is still used today. 
It was captured by the Persians in 546 b.c. Then when Alexander the Great destroyed the Persian Empire two centuries later, Sardis fell under the rule of Macedonian generals and monarchs. 
In 133 b.c. it became Roman and continued to remain a great city for over a thousand years more. It was finally destroyed in 1402 by the hosts of Tamerlane, the Mongol conqueror, and has lain in ruins ever since. 


Ö an itching palm




Once Brutus and Cassius meet in the former's tent, they have at each other, for both have accumulated grievances. Brutus scorns Cassius for his avarice: 


Let me tell you, Cassius, you yourself

Are much condemned to have an itching palm,

To sell and mart your offices for gold

To undeservers.





óAct IV, scene iii, lines 9-12 


The difficulty with the conspirators, as much as with the Triumvirate, is money. Soldiers must be paid or they will desert, and the money must be obtained. Cassius therefore sold appointments to high positions for ready cash, and it is this Brutus scorns. 
Another source of money was from the surrounding population. The helpless civilians had no way of resisting the armies, and during the early part of 42 b.c., for instance, Cassius stripped the island of Rhodes of all its precious metals. Asia Minor felt the squeeze too. Wherever Cassius' army passed, the natives were stripped bare and, in some cases, killed when they had given the last drachma. Brutus scorns this too, for he says: 


Ö I can raise no money by vile means. By heaven,

I had rather coin my heart

And drop my blood for drachmas than to wring

From the hard hands of peasants their vile trash

By any indirection.





óAct IV, scene iii, lines 71-75


This sounds good, but in the course of the Pompeian war, Brutus, as an actual historical character, had spent some time on the island of Cyprus. There he had oppressed the provincials heartlessly, squeezing money out of them without pity, and writing complaining letters that he was prevented from squeezing still more out of them by other officials. 
Then too, while Cassius was draining Rhodes, Brutus demanded money of the city of Xanthus in Asia Minor, and when the city would not (or could not) pay, he destroyed it. He is supposed to have felt remorse after the destruction of Xanthus and to have ceased trying to collect money in this fashion. 
And yet he lists one of his grievances against Cassius as: 


I did send to you

For certain sums of gold, which you denied me;





óAct IV, scene iii, lines 69-70 


It is immediately after that that he says unctuously that he "can raise no money by vile means." In other words, he cannot steal but he is willing to have Cassius steal, share in the proceeds, and then scorn Cassius as a robber. Neither Brutus' intelligence nor his honesty ever seem to survive the words Shakespeare carefully put into his mouth. 


Ö swallowed fire




In the quarrel, it is Cassius who backs away, and the scene ends in a reconciliation. Characteristically, Brutus praises himself unstintingly as one who is slow to anger and quick to forgive. He says: 


O Cassius, you are yoked with a lamb

That carries anger as the flint bears fire,

Who, much enforced, shows a hasty spark,

And straight is cold again.





óAct IV, scene iii, lines 109-12 


Brutus further explains his momentary anger by telling Cassius that his wife, Portia, is dead: 


Impatient of my absence,

And grief that young Octavius with Mark Antony

Have made themselves so strong-for with her death

That tidings came-with this she fell distract

And (her attendants absent) swallowed fire.




óAct IV, scene iii, lines 151-55 


According to Plutarch, she choked herself by putting hot embers into her mouth. This seems so strange a way of committing suicide as to be almost unbelievable. Is it possible that this is a distortion of a much more likely death-that she allowed a charcoal fire to burn in a poorly ventilated room and died of carbon monoxide poisoning? 


Ö farewell, Portia Ö




And now an odd thing happens. An officer, Marcus Valerius Messala, comes in with news from Rome. Brutus maneuvers nun (with considerable effort) into revealing the fact that Portia is dead. Without saying he already knows the fact, Brutus says calmly: 


Why, farewell, Portia. We must die, Messala.

With meditating that she must die once,

I have the patience to endure it now.





óAct IV, scene iii, lines 189-91 


Brutus adhered to that school of philosophy called Stoicism. It had been founded, some three centuries earlier, by a Greek philosopher, Zeno of Citium (who possibly had Phoenician ancestry as well). He lectured at a Stoa Poikile (a "painted porch"; that is, a corridor lined with frescoes) in Athens. From this porch the philosophy took its name. 
Stoicism saw the necessity of avoiding pain, but did not feel that choosing pleasure was the best way to do so. The only safe way of living the good life, Stoics felt, was to put oneself beyond both pleasure and pain: to train oneself not to be the slave of either passion or fear, to treat both happiness and woe with indifference. If you desire nothing, you need fear the loss of nothing. 
Brutus, with his "Why, farewell, Portia," was greeting the death of a loved one with the proper Stoic response. 
But why didn't he tell Messala that he already knew of the death in detail and had just been discussing it with Cassius? One theory is that, having written the proper Stoic scene with its "farewell, Portia," Shakespeare felt it presented Brutus in an unsympathetic light. He felt, perhaps, that an English audience could scarcely feel the proper sympathy for so extreme a Roman attitude; they would feel it repellently heartless. He therefore wrote the earlier scene in which Brutus is still Stoical but shows enough feeling to grow angry with Cassius. Then, the theory goes on, both versions appeared, through carelessness, in the final printed copy of the play. 
Yet it seems to me that this cannot be so. Shortly after Messala enters, Cassius, still brooding over the news, says to himself: 


Portia, art thou gone?





óAct IV, scene iii, line 165a 


To this Brutus makes a hasty response: 


No more, I pray you.





óAct IV, scene iii, line 165b 


It is as though he does more than merely neglect to tell Messala of his knowledge. He takes special pains to keep Cassius from telling him. 
Why? Perhaps precisely so he can strike the proper Stoic note. Since he already knows and the shock is over, he can greet the news with marvelous calm, and strike a noble pose. 
We might find an excuse for him and say that he was seizing the opportunity to be ostentatiously strong and Stoical in order to hearten his officers and his army with a good example. On the other hand, he might have done it out of a vain desire for praise. After all, as soon as Brutus makes his Stoic response, Messala says, worshipingly: 


Even so great men great losses should endure.





óAct IV, scene iii, line 192 


If this is so, and certainly it is a reasonable supposition, what a monster of vanity Shakespeare makes out Brutus to be. 


Cicero is dead




Before Messala has the news of Portia's death forced out of him, he delivers the news of the proscriptions of the Second Triumvirate. Dozens of men of senatorial rank have been executed. What's more, says Messala: 


Cicero is dead, And by that order of proscription.





óAct IV, scene iii, lines 178-79 


As soon as the Second Triumvirate was formed, Cicero, knowing that any accommodation between Octavius and Antony would have to be at his own expense, tried to escape from Italy. Contrary winds drove his ship back to shore, however, and before he could try again, the soldiers sent to kill him had arrived. 
Those with him, his servants and retainers, made as though to resist, but Cicero, sixty-three years old and tired of the wild vicissitudes of public life, found at the end the physical courage he had so conspicuously lacked throughout his life. Forbidding resistance, he waited calmly for the soldiers and was cut down on December 7, 43 b.c., twenty-one months after Julius Caesar's assassination. 


Ö toward Philippi




Brutus, meanwhile, has told of the news he himself has received; news to the effect that the triumvirs are on the move eastward, taking the offensive. He says: 


Messala, I have here received letters

That young Octavius and Mark Antony

Come down upon us with a mighty power,

Bending their expedition toward Philippi.





óAct IV, scene iii, lines 166-69 


Philippi was an important city in the province of Macedonia, and was located about ten miles north of the Aegean Sea. It had been built up on the site of an earlier village in 356 b.c. by Philip II, King of Macedon and father of Alexander the Great The city was named for Philip. 


Ö taken at the floodÖ




The question now is how best to react to the Triumvirate offensive. Cassius takes the cautious view. He suggests their forces remain on the defensive. 


'Tis better that the enemy seek us;

So shall he waste his means, weary his soldiers,

Doing himself offense, whilst we, lying still,

Are full of rest, defense, and nimbleness.





óAct IV, scene iii, lines 198-201 


Brutus, however, disagrees. He points out that the provinces between the enemy army and themselves are angered by the looting they have undergone and would join Antony and Octavius. Their own army, on the other hand, is as large as it is ever likely to be, and if they wait it will start declining. He says, sententiously, in a famous passage: 


There is a tide in the affairs of men

Which, taken at the flood, leads on to fortune;

Omitted, all the voyage of their life

Is bound in shallows and in miseries.





óAct IV, scene iii, lines 217-20 


Once again, Brutus contradicts Cassius and has his way and the result proves his judgment to be wrong. Throughout the play, Brutus consistently misjudges the moment when the tide is at the flood, and to place this passage in his mouth seems to intend irony. 


Ö this monstrous apparition




Brutus makes ready for sleep, in an almost family atmosphere of concern for his servants (and he is portrayed most nearly noble, in good truth, here). He settles down to read a book when suddenly he cries out: 


Ha! Who comes here?

I think it is the weakness of mine eyes

That shapes this monstrous apparition.





óAct IV, scene iii, lines 274-76 


It is the ghost of Caesar, which Brutus boldly accosts. It tells him only that they will meet again at Philippi. 
One might suppose that this was a Shakespearean invention, introduced for dramatic effect, for the chance of turning lights low, producing shadows, and chilling the audience, but, in actual fact, Shakespeare does not have to invent it. The report that Caesar's ghost appeared to Brutus is to be found in Plutarch. 
It is with a forward look to this scene, perhaps, that Shakespeare had had Mark Antony speak earlier of "Caesar's spirit." 


It proves not so. ..




The fifth act opens in the plains near Philippi, with the opposing armies facing each other and waiting for battle. Octavius, looking at the scene with grim satisfaction, says: 


Now, Antony, our hopes are answered;

You said the enemy would not come down,

But keep the hills and upper regions.

It proves not soÖ





óAct V, scene i, lines 1-4 


What had happened between the acts was this. Brutus and Cassius, crossing the straits into Macedonia from Asia Minor, encountered a portion of the triumvir army near Philippi. If the conspirators had attacked at once, they ought to have won, but before they could do so, the rest of the triumvir army arrived and it was a standoff. 
The triumvir army now outnumbered the conspirators but was weaker in cavalry. What is more, it was Brutus and Cassius who had the strong position in the hills, while Antony and Octavius occupied a marshy and malarial plain. 
Brutus and Cassius had only to stay where they were. It would have been suicidal for Antony and Octavius to try to charge into the hills. Yet to stay on the plains would expose them to hunger and disease. 
Indeed, Octavius was already sick, although this doesn't appear in the play. Octavius seemed always to be sick before a battle. In this case, he fell sick at Dyrrhachium (on the coast of what is now Albania) and had to be carried by litter the 250 miles to Philippi. 
Cassius opposed battle, maintaining that by waiting it out, the enemy would sooner or later have to retreat and that the effect would be one of victory for the conspirators. He was manifestly correct in this and Antony, putting himself grimly in the conspirators' place, was sure that was exactly what they would do. 
Antony still did not count on the egregious stupidity of Brutus. Brutus again opposed Cassius and favored immediate battle. Once again Brutus insisted on having his way. Once again Cassius gave in. 


Ö the Hybla bees




A parley between the opposing commanders was arranged before the battle. Perhaps an accommodation could be arranged. That could not be, however, for the conversation quickly degenerated into recriminations. At one point, Cassius refers bitterly to Antony's oratory (thinking perhaps of the funeral speech) and says: 


But for your words, they rob the Hybla bees,

And leave them honeyless.





óAct V, scene i, lines 34-35 


Hybla was a town in Sicily, on the southern slopes of Mount Etna, and some forty miles northwest of Syracuse. It was famous, almost proverbial, for its honey. 


Ö Brutus, thank yourself




In the wordy quarrel, Antony does have the best of it and Cassius finally is forced to become aware of Brutus' misjudgments. He says to Brutus angrily: 


Ö Now, Brutus, thank yourself;

This [Antony's] tongue had not offended so today,

If Cassius might have ruled.





óAct V, scene i, lines 45-47 


Surely he must have thought how, in all likelihood, the conspirators would have been long in control of Rome if only Antony had been killed along with Caesar, as he had advised. 


Was Cassius born




There is nothing, then, but to make ready for the actual battle. Cassius is seriously depressed, perhaps because it has been borne in upon him, forcefully, how wrong Brutus has been all through, and because he bitterly regrets all the times he gave in wrongly. 
It is now October 42 b.c., more than two and a half years since the assassination of Caesar, and Cassius says to his aide: 


Messala,

This is my birthday; as this very day

Was Cassius born.





óAct V, scene i, lines 70-72 


Since we don't know in what year Cassius was born, we can't say how old he was on the day of the Battle of Philippi. However, Plutarch refers to him as older than Brutus (a view Shakespeare adopts) and Brutus may have been born in 85 b.c. It would seem then that Cassius must be in his mid-forties at least and possibly pushing fifty. 
Cassius does not find the fact that the battle will be fought on his birthday to be a good omen. He does not want to fight it. He says to Messala: 


Be thou my witness that against my will

(As Pompey was) am I compelled to set

Upon one battle all our liberties.





óAct V, scene i, lines 73-75 


This is a reference to the fact that it is Brutus, not Cassius, who is pushing for battle. Cassius, who let himself be overruled, reminds himself, sadly, that Pompey was similarly forced into battle at Pharsalia, six years before, by the hotheads among his councilors, when cautious delay might have served his cause better. 


Ö I held Epicurus strong




To unavailing regret that he had allowed himself to be swayed by Brutus, Cassius finds trouble in supernatural omens. He says: 


You know that I held Epicurus strong,

And his opinion; now I change my mind,

And partly credit things that do presage.





óAct V, scene i, lines 76-78 


Epicurus of Samos was a Greek philosopher who was a contemporary of the Zeno who had founded Stoicism. Epicurus' philosophy (Epicureanism) adopted the beliefs of certain earlier Greek philosophers who viewed the universe as made up of tiny particles called atoms. All change consisted of the random breakup and rearrangement of groups of these atoms and there was little room in the Epicurean thought for any purposeful direction of man and the universe by gods. Omens and divine portents were considered empty superstition. 
Now, however, Cassius begins to waver. It seems two eagles, having accompanied the army from Sardis to Philippi, have now flown away, as though good luck were departing. On the other hand, all sorts of carrion birds are now gathering, as though bad luck were arriving. 
Cassius' pessimism forces him to question Brutus as to his intentions in case the battle is lost. Brutus answers in high Stoic fashion. His actions will follow: 


Even by the rule of that philosophy [Stoicism]

By which I did blame Cato for the death

Which he did give himself. ..





óAct V, scene i, lines 100-2 


Stoicism held it wrong to seek refuge in suicide. The good man must meet his fate, whatever it is, unmoved. Cassius asks, sardonically, if Brutus is ready, then, in case of defeat, to be led in triumph behind the conqueror's chariot through the Roman streets (and, undoubtedly, with the jeers of the Roman populace ringing in his ears). 
At once, Brutus' Stoicism fails him. As long as his Stoic demeanor brings him praise, it is well. If it is going to bring him disgrace he abandons it But he does so with characteristic self-praise: 


No, Cassius, no; think not, thou noble Roman

That ever Brutus will go bound to Rome;

He bears too great a mind.





óAct V, scene i, lines 110-12 


Since both plan to die in case of defeat, they may never meet again. Brutus says: 


Forever, and forever, farewell, Cassius!





óAct V, scene i, line 116 


Cassius answers in kind and both are now ready for the battle, which takes up the rest of the play. 


Ö the word too early




On both sides there was double command. Cassius on the seaward side opposed Antony; Brutus on the inland side opposed Octavius. The fortunes differed on the two flanks. Brutus had the advantage over Octavius and advanced vigorously. He sends messages of victory to the other flank by Messala, saying: 


Ö I perceive

But cold demeanour in Octavius' wing,

And sudden push gives them the overthrow.

Ride, ride, Messala!





óAct V, scene ii, lines 3-6 


But even now, in the midst of victory, Brutus judges wrongly. Brutus should, at all cost, have kept his part of the army from advancing in such a way that they could not support the other part in case of need. Instead, his men are overvictorious and fall to looting, when they ought to have wheeled down upon Antony's men. 
Antony's army manages instead to drive hard against Cassius' wing. That wing breaks and flies and can receive no help. Titinius, Cassius' aide, says bitterly: 


O Cassius, Brutus gave the word too early,

Who, having some advantage on Octavius,

Took it too eagerly; his soldiers fell to spoil,

Whilst we by Antony are all enclosed.





óAct V, scene iii, lines 5-8 


In Parthia Ö




Cassius' depression now costs him the final price. He does not realize the exact magnitude of Brutus' victory and therefore does not understand that even allowing for his own defeat, the battle is no worse than drawn. 
A band of Brutus' horsemen making their way toward him is mistaken by him for the enemy. When his aide, Titinius, reconnoitering, embraces them gladly, the nearsighted Cassius thinks he is taken prisoner and that his own capture is imminent. 
Cassius therefore calls his servant, Pindarus, saying: 


In Parthia did I take thee prisoner;

And then I swore thee, saving of thy life,

That whatsoever I did bid thee do,

Thou shouldst attempt it.





óAct V, scene ii, lines 37-40 


In Parthia, at the Battle of Carrhae, eleven years before, Cassius had carried through the greatest military achievement of his life. He had carefully husbanded the downhearted remnants of a defeated army and had safely brought them back to Syria. 
He had not despaired then, but he did now. He orders his slave to kill him with the same sword that had once pierced Caesar. It is done and Cassius dies. 


The last of all Romans Ö




When the news of Cassius' death is brought to Brutus, he comes to view the body and says: 
O Julius Caesar, thou art mighty yet! 


O Julius Caesar, thou art mighty yet!

Thy spirit walks abroad, and turns our swords

In our own proper entrails.




óAct V, scene iii, lines 94-96 


His eulogy over Cassius is: 


The last of all Romans, fare thee well!

It is impossible that ever Rome

Should breed thy fellowÖ




óAct V, scene iii, lines 99-101 


The statement is a gross exaggeration. Except for his conduct at the Battle of Carrhae, Cassius had shown little real ability. Even in organizing the successful conspiracy that killed Caesar, his weakness in allowing the stupid Brutus to guide affairs ruined all. 


Caesar, now be still




Shakespeare has the battle continuing as though it were all one piece. That is not so in actual history. 
After the drawn battle in which Cassius killed himself unnecessarily and Brutus was victorious on his wing, the two armies withdrew to lick their wounds. 
Brutus' army still held the stronger position and, what's more, Brutus controlled the sea approaches so that supplies were denied Antony and Octavius. He had but to stay where he was and he would still win. 
But he could not. The habit of wrong judgments could not be broken and this time there wasn't even Cassius present to argue vainly with him. After twenty days he marched to the attack again in a straightforward head-to-head battle. 
He lost again, brought the remnants back to a strong position once again, and might have sold his last bit dear, but that his soldiers refused to fight any more. 
There was nothing left to do but find somebody to kill him. This service was performed for him by his servant, Strato, who held the sword while Brutus ran upon it, saying: 


Caesar, now be still:

I killed not thee with half so good a will.





óAct V, scene v, lines 50-51 


To the end the talk is of CaesarÖ 


the noblest Roman of them all




There remains only the eulogy to be delivered over Brutus. Antony, surveying the dead body, says: 


This was the noblest Roman of them all.

All the conspirators save only he

Did that they did in envy of great Caesar;

He, only in a general honest thought

And common good to all, made one of them.





óAct V, scene v, lines 68-72 


Plutarch reports that "it was said" that Antony had, on a number of occasions, said something like this. Was it to win over those who had been on Brutus' side for the war that was to follow between himself and Octavius? Was it out of gratitude, since Brutus had refused to allow Antony to be killed on the ides of March? Did Antony really believe what he said? 
In terms of Shakespeare's play, this final eulogy is so devastatingly wrong, it can be accepted only as irony. How can we possibly follow Antony in saying that Brutus was the only one who didn't act out of envy, when Shakespeare shows us that he was the only one who surely acted out of envy. 
In the great seduction scene in Act I, scene ii, Cassius turns all his arguments against Brutus' weak point, his monstrous vanity. He paints a world in which Caesar is all and Brutus nothing, knowing that Brutus cannot bear such a thought. Finally, he makes the comparison a brutally direct one: 


Brutus and Caesar: what should be in that "Caesar"?

Why should that name be sounded more than yours?

Write them together, yours is as fair a name;

Sound them, it doth become the mouth as well;

Weigh them, it is as heavy; conjure with 'em,

"Brutus" will start a spirit as soon as "Caesar."





óAct I, scene ii, lines 142-47 


It might be argued that Cassius was speaking generally, comparing Caesar to any other Roman citizen, but the fact is that he made the comparison to Brutus specifically, and Brutus listened. Take this together with Brutus' character as painstakingly revealed in every other facet of the play and we can be certain that he was not the only conspirator not driven by envy. On the contrary, he was the one conspirator who was driven only by envy. 








12. The Tragedy of Antony And Cleopatra


I 1607 Shakespeare returned to North's edition of Plutarch, from which eight years before he had taken material for Julius Caesar. Using Plutarch's biography of Mark Antony, Shakespeare wrote what was virtually a continuation of the earlier play, and made it the most Plutarchian of the three plays he derived from that source. 
Antony and Cleopatra begins almost at the point where Julius Caesar had left off. 
Brutus and Cassius have been defeated at the double battle at Philippi in 42 b.c. by the troops under Mark Antony and Octavius Caesar. These two, together with Lepidus, the third member of the Triumvirate (see page I-301), are now in a position to divide the Roman realm among themselves. 
Octavius Caesar took western Europe for his third, with the capital at Rome itself. It was what he could best use, for it left him with the Senate and the political power-center of the realm. Octavius was a politician and the battles he could best fight (and win) were battles of words with the minds of men at stake. 
Lepidus was awarded the province of Africa, centering about the city of Carthage. It was an inconsiderable portion for an inconsiderable man, and Lepidus was and remained a mere appendage of Octavius Caesar. Lepidus grew important only when someone was required to act as go-between where the two major partners were concerned. 
Mark Antony had the East and this suited him very well. Except for the days immediately following Julius Caesar's assassination, Antony had never gotten along well in Rome. He preferred the Eastern provinces, which were far the richer and more sophisticated portion of the Roman realm. Mark Antony was a hedonist; he knew how to appreciate pleasure, and in the great cities of the East he knew he would find it. 
He was also a soldier who welcomed war, and in the East he knew he would find that too. The Parthians were to be found there. Eleven years before they had destroyed a Roman army (see page I-257) and for that they had never been punished. Antony hoped to deliver that punishment.


Ö this dotage of our general'sÖ




All Antony's plans went awry, however, when in 41 b.c. he encountered Cleopatra, the fascinating Queen of Egypt. He fell sufficiently in love with her to forget the necessity of beating the Parthians and to neglect the threat of the slow, crafty advance of Octavius Caesar in Rome. 
The love story of Antony and Cleopatra has captured the imagination of the world, and has left generations sighing. (And never has it been as ap-pealingly and as majestically described as in this play.) In its own time, however, the affair must have been viewed with impatience by those soldiers who were bound to Antony and who found themselves neglected, their chance for loot and glory vanishing. 
The play opens in Cleopatra's palace in Alexandria, the capital of Egypt Two soldiers, Demetrius and Philo, come onstage. Philo, who knows the situation, expresses his soldierly displeasure to Demetrius, who apparently is a newcomer fresh from Rome. Philo says: 


Nay, but this dotage of our general's

O'erflows the measure. Those his goodly eyes

That o'er the files and musters of the war

Have glowed like plated Mars, now bend, now turn

The office and devotion of their view

Upon a tawny front.





óAct I, scene i, lines 1-6 


The expression "tawny front" means "dark face" and this represents a misconception concerning Cleopatra that has been common in later times and that can never be corrected, in all likelihood. Because she was the ruler of an African land and because she was an "Egyptian," she has been presumed to be dark, dusky, swarthy, even perhaps part Negress. She may have been dark, to be sure, but she was no darker, necessarily, than any other Greek, for she was not of Egyptian descent. 
Egypt had become the kingdom of Cleopatra's forebears back in 323 b.c. when Alexander the Great had died. Alexander had conquered the entire Persian Empire, of which Egypt was part, and after his death one of his generals, Ptolemaios (or Ptolemy, as he is known in English), seized Egypt. In 305 b.c. Ptolemy adopted the title of long and from then on, for two and a half centuries, his descendants, each named Ptolemy, ruled Egypt. 
Ptolemy I, the first of the kings of Ptolemaic Egypt, was a Macedonian, a native of the Greek-speaking kingdom of Macedon, lying just north of Greece proper. All the Ptolemies married Greeks and all the rulers of Ptolemaic Egypt, down to and including Cleopatra, were completely Greek. Cleopatra's father had been Ptolemy XI, the great-great-great-great-great-great-grandson of Ptolemy I. There had been a number of Ptolemaic queens, by the way, who bore the name of Cleopatra (a perfectly good Greek name meaning "glory of her father," and not Egyptian at all). The one in Shakespeare's play is actually Cleopatra VII, but she is the only one remembered today and the name without the numeral is enough. There is no danger of confusion with any of the first six. 
The notion of Cleopatra as a dark African is carried on further as the speech continues, with Philo saying of Antony: 


His captain's heart,

Which in the scuffles of great fights hath burst

The buckles on his breast, reneges all temper

And is become the bellows and the fan

To cool a gypsy's lust.





óAct I, scene i, lines 6-10 


The word "gypsy" means simply "Egyptian" here, but although Cleopatra was an Egyptian by nationality, she was not one by descent. Indeed, the true Egyptians were a "lower class" to the ruling Greeks, as the natives of India once were to the ruling British. Cleopatra would undoubtedly have been terribly offended to have been considered an "Egyptian." 
Furthermore, the word "gypsy" by Shakespeare's time had come to be applied to a wandering group of men and women of unknown origin. Popular rumor had them coming from Egypt, hence "gypsy," but it is much more likely they came from India (see page I-149). To call Cleopatra a "gypsy," then, is to call up visions of swarthy women in markedly non-Western costume, both to Shakespeare's audience and our own. 


The triple pillar of the world. ..




Antony, Cleopatra, and their train of maids and eunuchs are entering now, and Philo says of Mark Antony, more bitterly still: 


Take but good note, and you shall see in him

The triple pillar of the world transformed Into a strumpet's fool.





óAct I, scene i, lines 11-13 


Antony is one of the three members of the Second Triumvirate. All three together support and rule the Roman realm, hence "triple pillar." 
Rome is referred to here as "the world." In a way, it was to the ancients, for it included the entire Mediterranean basin and virtually all the lands that the Greeks and Romans considered "civilized."
Thus, in the Bible, the Gospel of St. Luke speaks of a decree by Caesar Augustus (the very same Octavius Caesar of this play-but a generation later) to the effect that the Roman realm be taxed. The biblical verse phrases it this way: "And it came to pass in those days, that there went out a decree from Caesar Augustus, that all the world should be taxed" (Luke 2:1). 
Of course, such phraseology is exaggerated. The Romans (and Shakespeare too) knew that the Roman government didn't rule over all the earth. There were barbarian tribes north of the northern limits of Rome, tribes who would make their presence felt all too painfully in a couple of centuries. And even if the view is confined to civilized areas, the Romans (and Shakespeare too) knew that the Roman government didn't rule over all the civilized earth. To the east of the eastern limits of Rome was the Parthian Empire, a civilized region that had already beaten Rome once and continued to remain a deadly danger to it. (There were also civilizations in China and India, but these lay beyond the Roman horizon.) 
In this particular play, however, the transmutation of Rome into the world is dramatically advantageous. Antony is playing for the rule of the whole realm, and loses it, partly through his own miscalculations, and partly through his love affair with Cleopatra. It becomes intensely dramatic, then, to be able to say, he "lost the world." It becomes even more dramatic to say he lost it for love. 
In fact, the English poet John Dryden in 1678 wrote his version of the tale of Antony and Cleopatra (far inferior to Shakespeare's), which he called, in the most romantic possible vein, All for Love; or the World Well Lost. 


Ö tell me how much




Antony and Cleopatra speak now and they are engaged in the foolish love talk of young lovers. Cleopatra is pouting: 


If it be love indeed, tell me how much.





óAct I, scene i, line 14 


Yet Cleopatra is not a schoolgirl. She is an experienced woman who has lived and loved fully. She was born in 69 b.c., so she was twenty-eight years old when she met Antony. 
Cleopatra's father, Ptolemy XI, died in 51 b.c. and her younger brother, the thirteen-year-old Ptolemy XII, succeeded to the throne. Cleopatra, then nearly eighteen, ruled jointly with him. She got tangled up in palace politics, however, and fled to Syria to raise an army with which to seize undisputed control of the country.
It was at this time, 48 b.c., that Pompey appeared in Egypt, fleeing from the defeat inflicted on him at Pharsalia by Julius Caesar (see page I-257). Pompey was killed by the Egyptians and Julius Caesar landed in Alexandria soon after. 
Cleopatra realized that the real power in the Mediterranean basin rested with Rome. Egypt was the only remaining independent power of any consequence along all the Mediterranean shore, and even she could not do a thing without Roman permission. She couldn't even play her game of internal politics if Rome seriously objected. Cleopatra also realized that Julius Caesar was now the most powerful Roman. If she could gain him to her side, then, he would certainly place her on the throne. 
She had herself smuggled in to Julius Caesar (so the story goes) wrapped in a carpet. The later storytellers insist that when the carpet was unwrapped, she stepped out nude. 
Julius Caesar did see the merits of her case (however persuaded) and spent a year in Alexandria, needlessly interfering in Egyptian politics and running considerable danger himself. During this interval, Cleopatra is supposed to have been his mistress. (He was fifty-two years old at the time, she twenty-one.) At least she bore a son which, she insisted, was his, and called him Ptolemy Caesar. The son was known, popularly, as Caesarion. 
In 47 b.c. Caesar left Alexandria, went to Asia Minor to fight a brief battle, then turned westward to win victories in Africa and Spain, and finally came back to Rome as Dictator. He was assassinated just as he was about to make himself king. 
There is a story that he brought Cleopatra to Rome and that she managed to get away and return to Egypt after the assassination. This, however, is based on an ambiguous line in one of Cicero's letters, and is very probably not so. Caesar was far too clever a politician to complicate his plans by bringing a "foreign queen" to Rome and setting her up as his mistress. What's more, Cleopatra was far too clever a queen to want to leave her turbulent country for others to control and loot just so she could be a hated mistress to an aging Roman politician. 
She very likely stayed in Alexandria between 47 b.c., when Caesar left, and 41 b.c., when she met Mark Antony. 


Fulvia perchance is angry. ..




The love murmurings of Antony and Cleopatra are interrupted, however, by messengers from Rome. Antony is annoyed at having his mood punctured and wants the messengers to be brief and leave. Cleopatra, however, is always petulant at any mention of Rome, any hint of the great affairs that might take Antony away from her as once they had taken Julius Caesar. She grows peevishly sarcastic:


Nay, hear them, Antony.

Fulvia perchance is angryÖ





óAct I, scene i, lines 19-20 


Fulvia is Mark Antony's third wife; a fierce and ambitious woman, not inferior to Cleopatra in fire, but, presumably, lacking Cleopatra's sexual fascination. At least she didn't fascinate Antony. 
Antony was her third husband. Her first husband had been that Publius Clodius who had been the occasion for Julius Caesar's divorce from his second wife (see page I-261) and who had turned into a gang leader who made Cicero his particular prey. 
When Cicero was killed as a result of the proscriptions that followed the establishment of the Second Triumvirate (see page I-306), Fulvia had his head brought to her as proof of his death. When it was in her hands, she drove her hairpin through the dead tongue of the great orator with savage glee, as vengeance against the eloquence that had so lacerated two of her husbands, Clodius and Antony. 
Antony had headed east, after his division of the world with Octavius Caesar and Lepidus, without bothering to take the formidable Fulvia with him. (No doubt that was not an oversight, either.) Any mention of his fierce wife undoubtedly embarrassed Mark Antony, and Cleopatra knew it. 


Ö the scarce-bearded Caesar Ö




Cleopatra went further than that. The news might not be merely from Fulvia; it might be from Octavius Caesar. She says: 


Ö or who knows

If the scarce-bearded Caesar have not sent

His pow'rful mandate to you.





óAct I, scene i, lines 20-22 


This must sting. Antony is forty-one years old when the play opens; a grizzled warrior more than a score of years in the field. Octavius Caesar is nineteen years his junior, only twenty-two years old now. Antony had to resent the fact that so young a man should be able to hold himself on an equal plane with the mature warrior. 
(Incidentally, in this play Octavius Caesar is always referred to as "Caesar," where he was always referred to as "Octavius" in Julius Caesar. I shall call him "Octavius Caesar" in order to avoid confusing him with Julius Caesar.) 
Cleopatra gets what she wants. The baited Antony cries out:


Let Rome in Tiber melt, and the wide arch

Of the ranged empire fall! Here is my space,





óAct I, scene i, lines 33-34 


He refuses to hear the messengers and leaves. 


Ö prized so slight




The soldiers, Philo and Demetrius, who have watched these proceedings with surprise and disapproval, cannot believe that Antony can be so careless of his own interests. Demetrius says: 


Is Caesar with Antonius prized so slight?





óAct I, scene i, line 56 


Demetrius, fresh from Rome, knows what Octavius Caesar is doing, if Antony does not. 
Octavius Caesar, young though he was, was one of the master politicians of history. He lost no time in frivolity of any kind. He was a cold, shrewd man, who never made a serious mistake, and whose destiny it was to carry through to a conclusion the plans of his great-uncle, Julius Caesar. He was not, perhaps, as brilliant as the great Julius in war or literature, but he was even wiser in politics, for he carried through the necessary governmental reforms without ever making use of the hated word "king," but making himself in the end far greater than a king. 
Nor did Octavius Caesar have the romantic appeal of Antony, or Antony's ability to orate, or his talent for putting on a kind of bluff, hail-fellow-well-met exterior that made him tremendously popular with the soldiers. Octavius could never be loved till age, and the realization at last of his greatness, had made him a father figure to the people. 
Antony always underrated him and did not realize that the young man was building a network of alliances with politicians and generals, binding them to himself by self-interest rather than love, and weaving a net that would end by making him all-powerful. 
Shakespeare too underprizes him, but this is necessary for the sake of the drama. The audience sympathy must be with the lovable profligate and not with the cool politician. 
Nevertheless, though all audiences must "root" for Antony (for Shakespeare wills it so, and wins me over too), truth compels one to say that Octavius Caesar was by far the greater man of the two and that it would have been a world tragedy if circumstance had allowed Mark Antony to beat him.


Ö the common liarÖ Demetrius goes on to say:

I am full sorry

That he approves the common liar, who

Thus speaks of him at Rome;





óAct I, scene i, lines 59-61 


Octavius Caesar, in his ceaseless war against Antony, made skillful use of propaganda. When the two triumvirs were at peace, Octavius carefully sapped the other's strength in the West by spreading tales of his profligacy. 
Cicero's fiery and vituperative speeches in the last year of his life had covered Antony with slime. And though Cicero's invective was remorselessly exaggerated, much of it stuck. Antony, who did carouse and who loved luxury, gave all too much ground for believing much worse about him than was true. 
Octavius Caesar made use of Cicero's speeches and also made use of the new matter that Antony offered. Antony was with this "foreign queen." Rome had fought many wars with Eastern monarchs and it was easy to escalate this affair with Cleopatra into threatened treason. 
In contrast, Octavius Caesar never stopped playing the part of the true Roman, industrious, grave, honorable, and devoted to public affairs. 
He himself was in love with no exotic temptress. He had been married twice to fine Roman girls. He had had no sons, though. His first wife was childless and his second had one daughter. He was soon to marry a third and last time, however, to the best one yet, a girl named Livia. 
Livia was not yet twenty, but she was already married, had a fine young son, and was pregnant with (as it turned out) a second son. She divorced her husband to marry Octavius Caesar, but there was no stigma attached to divorce in those days. She became a model Roman matron, who remained Octavius' wife for the rest of his long life; they remained married for fifty-two years, a phenomenal length of time for a marriage in those days. Livia then lived on as his revered widow for fifteen more years. What's more, although she had no children by Octavius Caesar, her own children by her earlier marriage proved capable warriors and one of them succeeded his stepfather to the rule of all Rome. 
The city of Rome was filled, then, with talk of how wicked Mark Antony was and how noble and good Octavius Caesar was, and this played an important part in Octavius' schemes. It was part of Antony's folly that he continually gave men cause to look upon these exaggerated rumors as true (as Demetrius points out) and that he never made an effort to set up effective counterpropaganda of his own. He was entirely too trusting in his own reputation and capacity as a warrior. -As though that were everything. 


Ö Herod of JewryÖ




The scene shifts to Cleopatra's palace, where we find the Queen's ladies in waiting having fun at the expense of a soothsayer, who nevertheless makes some statements which turn out to have dramatic irony. He predicts, for instance, that Cleopatra's lady in waiting Charmian will outlive her mistress, and so she does in the end-by about a minute. 
At one point, though, Charmian asks him to predict some ridiculous fortunes, including: 


Ö let me have a child at fifty, to whom

Herod of Jewry may do homage.. .





óAct I, scene ii, lines 27-28 


This serves to set the time of the play in a way peculiarly useful to Shakespeare's audience. It is the time in which Herod "the Great" is on the throne of Judea. 
Judea had lost its independence in 63 b.c. (twenty-two years before the time this play opens), when Pompey (see page I-255) had absorbed it into the Roman realm. It had been given some internal freedom, however, and Pompey made the capable Antipater its king. Antipater was from Idumaea (the biblical Edom) and was not a Jew by birth, though he had become one by conversion. He was assassinated in 43 b.c., just a year after Julius Caesar had been. 
His eldest surviving son, Herod, also a converted Jew, and now thirty years old, was the natural successor, but the Eastern provinces were in a ferment. Brutus and Cassius were trying to strengthen themselves for the fight against Mark Antony and Octavius, and the Parthians were doing their best to take advantage of the disorder in Rome. In fact, after the Battle of Philippi, the Parthians swarmed all over Syria and Judea, and Herod was forced to flee. 
He came to Antony for support, and this Antony gave him and continued to give him even though Cleopatra bitterly opposed Herod. Herod became King of Judea, then, at just about the time that Charmian refers to him so jestingly. Still, things didn't settle sufficiently for Herod actually to enter Jerusalem and take the throne till 37 B.C. 
The reference to the child to whom Herod might do homage is clear enough too. Whenever the political fortunes of the Jews declined, then-hopes for an ideal king or "anointed one" rose. (The Hebrew word for "anointed one" is "Messiah.")
Now that the briefly independent Jewish kingdom under the Maccabees had fallen and the Romans were in control, Messianic hopes rose. All Judea seemed to wait for some child to be born who would be the ideal king and under whom the world system would finally break apart, with Jerusalem becoming the capital of the world and all the nations confessing the one true God. 
Undoubtedly, non-Jews heard of these longings and were amused. Charmian suggests, then, that perhaps when she is fifty she may give birth to this Messiah, this true King of the Jews, to whom Herod, a mere earthly king, will have to do homage. And, indeed, Jesus was born before the end of Herod's reign at a time when Charmian, had she lived, would have been not much more than fifty. 


Good Isis.. .




The mischievous Charmian also asks the soothsayer to prophesy for the courtier Alexas, who had brought the soothsayer to court for Cleopatra's amusement. She asks that a series of unsatisfactory wives be foretold for him. She says, laughingly: 


Good Isis, hear me this prayer,

though thou deny me a matter of more weight: good Isis,

I beseech thee!





óAct I, scene ii, lines 68-70 


Isis was the chief goddess of the Egyptian pantheon. For the most part, the Egyptian deities made little impact on the culturally snobbish Greeks and, therefore, on the Western world, which draws most of its culture from Greek sources. 
Isis was the chief exception. For one thing, she was an extraordinarily attractive goddess; a thoroughly human female amid an array of animal-headed deities. She plays a sympathetic role in the Egyptian version of the vegetation-cycle myth (see page I-5). Her brother-husband, Osiris, was killed through treachery by Set, the god of darkness. Osiris' body was cut to pieces and scattered throughout Egypt. The lovely and sorrowing Isis painstakingly searched the land, collected the pieces, put them together, and brought Osiris back to life. 
Isis' influence was felt outside the borders of Egypt. As the beautiful "Queen of Heaven" her worship penetrated Rome itself in the dark days of Hannibal's onslaught, when the Romans felt the shortcomings of their own gods and snatched at others. In the days of the Roman Empire (in the centuries following the time of Antony and Cleopatra) temples to Isis were built and her rites celebrated, even in the far-off island of Britain, two thousand miles from the Nile.
After Christianity was established, the spell of Isis still continued to make itself felt. As the goddess of birth and motherhood, she was frequently portrayed with her child, Horus, on her lap. The popular concept of mother and child was transferred to Christianity in the form of the Virgin and the infant Jesus, so that the aura of Isis lingers over the world even now. 


A Roman thought. ..




In comes Cleopatra in dark humor, for she can't find Antony. She says: 


He was disposed to mirth; but on the sudden

A Roman thought hath struck him.





óAct I, scene ii, lines 83-84 


The thought of the messengers and what the news might be had apparently gnawed at Antony. Part of him is Roman still, and he left to find them. 


Ö my brother Lucius




The news is disturbing indeed, for it deals with war, and a particularly embarrassing one too, for it is Antony's wife, of all people, who is conducting it. The Messenger says: 


Fulvia thy wife first came into the field.





óAct I, scene ii, line 89 


Fulvia, her eyesight sharpened, perhaps, by the anger and humiliation she felt at her husband's preoccupation with the Egyptian enchantress, saw what Mark Antony did not-that Octavius Caesar would win it all if he were not stopped. 
She therefore did her best to instigate war against Octavius, raising an army and putting it in the field. It probably did not escape her calculation that if she caused enough mischief, her husband's hand would be forced and he would have to come back to Italy to fight-and rejoin her. 
Mark Antony is stupefied. He asks: 


Against my brother Lucius?





óAct I, scene ii, line 90 


Lucius was Mark Antony's younger brother, and had held a variety of important political posts. In 41 b.c., after the Battle of Philippi and the following division of Rome among the triumvirs, Lucius Antony was made consul. 
Actually, the consulate had become an unimportant office by now, for Octavius Caesar was the only real power in Rome, but it still had its prestige. It was a bow to Mark Antony's importance that his brother should be consul. Furthermore, it gave Mark Antony a foothold, so to speak, in the capital, though unfortunately for Antony, not a very competent one. 
It was Lucius Antony's duty as consul to oppose the rebellious Fulvia, so that at the very first they seemed to be at war with each other. This was what occasioned Antony's surprise, that his wife should begin a war that would have to be against his brother. 
Apparently, that war did not last long. Fulvia talked Lucius into joining her. The Messenger explains: 


Ö soon that war had end, and the time's state

Made friends of them, pointing their force 'gainst Caesar,

Whose better issue in the war, from Italy

Upon the first encounter drave them.





óAct I, scene ii, lines 92-95 


It wasn't quite that quick a victory for Octavius Caesar, but it was quick enough. Octavius' armies drove the forces of Fulvia and Lucius northward and penned them up in the city of Perusia (the modern Perugia, a hundred miles north of Rome). There the forces lay under siege for some months before the city was taken. This short conflict is called the Perusine War. 
The war was a disaster for Mark Antony, because he knew everyone would believe that he was behind it (though he was not) and it would give Octavius Caesar all the excuse he needed to picture himself as the innocent victim of wanton aggression. 
If Fulvia had to fight, she might at least not have been so quickly defeated, so that Antony might have had something to offset the propaganda victory that had been handed Octavius Caesar. Worse still was the manner of the defeat. The food supply in the city was small and it was reserved for the soldiers of Fulvia and Lucius, who let the civil population starve. Moreover, the final surrender was made on condition that the army's leaders be spared. So they were, but the city itself was sacked in 40 b.c. 
This callousness on the part of Fulvia and Lucius Antony, who saved their skins at the expense of thousands of common people, was not lost on the Roman populace. They were execrated and some of the execrations were bound to fall on Mark Antony, whose reputation in Italy took another serious drop.


Ö with his Parthian force




But there is worse news still. It is not only inside the Roman realm that army fights army. The external enemy is tearing at the Eastern provinces and has reached a peak of power. The Messenger says: 


Labienus-

This is stiff news-hath with his

Parthian force Extended Asia; from Euphrates

His conquering banner shook, from Syria

To Lydia and to Ionia,





óAct I, scene ii, lines 100-4 


Quintus Labienus had fought on the side of Brutus and Cassius and had refused to abandon the cause even after the Battle of Philippi and the death of the two conspirators. Instead, he fled to the Parthians, whose armies hovered along the course of the Euphrates River, east of Asia Minor and Syria. 
Parthia was originally the name of an eastern province of the Persian Empire. It was conquered by Alexander the Great and, after Alexander's death in 323 b.c., it was incorporated hi the Seleucid Empire (see page I-183). The Seleucid grip remained rather loose. 
In 171 b.c., while Antiochus IV was the Seleucid king (see page I-183), Mithradates I became ruler of Parthia. He made his land fully independent, and under the weak successors of Antiochus IV, the Parthians drove westward. In 147 b.c. they took over control of the Tigris-Euphrates valley, the home of the ancient civilizations of Sumeria and Babylonia, and in 129 b.c. they founded their own capital of Ctesiphon on the Tigris River. 
The last Seleucid kings were penned into the constricted area of Syria itself, with Antioch as their capital, and in 64 b.c. that was made into a Roman province by Pompey. 
Across the Euphrates, Rome and Parthia now faced each other. Under Orodes II, Parthia defeated Crassus in 53 b.c.; he was still king when the Battle of Philippi was fought in 42 b.c. He remained eager to do Rome all the harm he could and when Labienus, a trained Roman soldier, defected to him, he was delighted and promptly placed a Parthian army at his disposal. 
In 40 b.c. the Parthians under Labienus moved westward, and in short order almost all of Syria and Asia Minor was occupied, with various Roman garrisons joining the renegade general. Lydia was an ancient kingdom in western Asia Minor (and still served as the name of a region of the peninsula when it was under Roman domination), while Ionia was the territory along the western seacoast of Asia Minor. The mention of the two districts by the Messenger shows that all of the peninsula was now under Parthian control. (It was from this Parthian advance that Herod fled, and in 40 b.c. the Parthians, for the only time in their history, marched into Jerusalem.) 
All this is bitter for Mark Antony, for it took place in his half of the realm. He, the great soldier, has done nothing to prevent it, and he himself realizes that to Rome it will now look as though he lounged languidly with Cleopatra even while foreign armies were tearing Rome apart. 
Mark Antony must realize that while he can get away with mere profligacy as long as he can win battles, the loss of his military reputation as well will cause him to lose everything. He mutters: 


These strong Egyptian fetters

I must break Or lose myself in dotage.





óAct I, scene ii, lines 117-18 


From SicyonÖ




But another Messenger waits and Antony calls for him: 


From Sicyon, ho, the news!





óAct I, scene ii, line 114 


Sicyon is a Greek city in the northwest Peloponnesus, fifty miles west of Athens. It was at the peak of its power about 600 b.c. when it was the rule of three generations of benevolent "tyrants," a one-man rule that lasted longer without interruption than in any other case in Greek history. After the fall of the tyranny in 565 b.c., Sicyon was usually dominated by the larger and more powerful cities of Sparta or Corinth. Only after Corinth was destroyed by the Romans in 146 b.c. did Sicyon experience another period of prominence. When Corinth was rebuilt, however, Sicyon began its final decline and the event that the Messenger is about to tell is very nearly the last of importance in its history. 
The news is brief, for the Messenger says: 


Fulvia thy wife is dead.





óAct I, scene ii, line 119 


Fulvia reached Sicyon in her flight from Italy and then died there in 40 b.c. Antony is stricken. Now that she is gone, he recognizes in her that energy and drive which has recently been missing in himself and says: 


/ must from this enchanting queen break off:

Ten thousand harms, more than the ills I know,

My idleness doth hatch.





óAct I, scene ii, lines 129-3la 


Ö Enobarbus






Antony is doing his best to make up his mind to leave Cleopatra, and he calls his most reliable aide: 


Ho now, Enobarbus!





óAct I, scene ii, line 131b 


Enobarbus is a shortened form of Ahenobarbus, and the person being called is, in full, Gnaeus Domitius Ahenobarbus. His father had fought with Pompey against Caesar and had died at the Battle of Pharsalus. 
Enobarbus himself had fought with Brutus and Cassius against Mark Antony and Octavius Caesar and had commanded the fleet, in fact. Even after the Battle of Philippi, Enobarbus had held out as a pirate until he was won over by Mark Antony in 40 B.C., just before this play opens. He then became one of the most ardent of Antony's adherents. 


Ö Sextus Pompeius




It is not surprising that Antony must leave for Rome. He must take care of the Parthian menace and he cannot do it if he leaves an angry Octavius Caesar in his rear. He must mend fences there, explain away the actions of his wife and brother, and patch up an understanding. Then, and only then, can he turn on the Parthians. In addition, there is trouble in the West, for that matter. Antony says to Enobarbus: 


Ö the letters too

Of many our contriving friends in Rome

Petition us at home. Sextus Pompeius

Hath given the dare to Caesar and commands

The empire of the sea.





óAct I, scene ii, lines 183-87 


Sextus Pompeius (also called Pompey the Younger) was the younger son of Pompey the Great. He had been in Greece with his father when the Battle of Pharsalus had been lost and he was in the ship with his father when Pompey fled to Egypt. He remained in the ship as his father was rowed to the Egyptian shore and witnessed his father being stabbed and killed when he reached that shore. He was about twenty-seven years old then. 
Some years later Sextus was in Spain when his older brother, Gnaeus Pompeius, held out against Julius Caesar. He was at the Battle of Munda, in which Gnaeus was defeated and slain in 45 b.c. (see page I-258). Sextus escaped and during the confusion that followed the assassination of Julius Caesar, quietly built up his strength at sea. 
By 40 b.c. he was in control of the Mediterranean. He had seized Sicily soon after the assassination and was still holding it. This cut off Rome's grain supply, part of which came from Sicily itself, with the rest coming from Africa and Egypt in ships that Sextus could easily intercept. What it amounted to was that this younger son of Pompey had his hand at the throat of Rome, and Octavius Caesar, who lacked a navy, could do nothing about it. 
Naturally, since nothing succeeds like success, there was the danger that Sextus' increasing power would breed still further access of power. As Antony says: 


Our slippery people,

Whose love is never linked to the deserver

Till his deserts are past, begin to throw

Pompey the Great and all his dignities

Upon his son;




óAct I, scene ii, lines 187-91 


(In this play Sextus' lines are identified as those of "Pompey," but I shall call him Sextus or Sextus Pompeius in order not to confuse him with his father, Pompey the Great.) 


Ö Nilus' slimeÖ




Enobarbus tells Cleopatra of the forthcoming separation (Antony has been with her a year), and she goes seeking Antony himself to confirm the news. 
Poor Antony is in a dilemma. He is no match for Cleopatra and can only fluster and fume. He tries to be consoling and reassuring, but she will have none of it. He even tries to explain to her that her greatest fear (that he will return to his wife, Fulvia) is gone, since Fulvia is dead. She turns even that against him, saying: 


O most false love!

Where be the sacred vials thou shouldst fill

With sorrowful water? Now I see, I see,

In Fulvia's death, how mine received shall be.





óAct I, scene iii, lines 62-65 


In view of what is to happen in Act IV, this is dramatic irony, for Antony will react quite differently to the report of Cleopatra's death.
In frustration, Antony protests that he is faithful to her even though he must leave. He says: 


By the fire

That quickens Nilus' slime, I go from hence

Thy soldier-servant Ö





óAct I, scene iii, lines 68-70 


Egypt is a desert land where it never rains. What makes life possible there is the presence of the Nile River. (The name is of unknown origin. The Egyptians called it simply "The River"; but the Greeks named it "Neilos," which is "Nilus" in Latin spelling and "Nile" to us.) 
The Nile is an unfailing source of water for drinking and irrigation. Once a year, moreover, its level rises as the snow on the distant Abyssinian and Kenyan mountains melt. The river waters flood the banks and deposit silt brought down from east-central Africa. The water-soaked fresh soil is outstandingly fertile and in the hot African sun ("the fire that quickens Nilus' slime") generous harvests grow. 


Ö this Herculean RomanÖ




When Cleopatra's perversity finally moves Antony to rage, she still fleers at him, accusing him of merely pretending anger. She says: 


Look, prithee, Charmian,

How this Herculean Roman does become

The carriage of his chafe.





óAct I, scene iii, lines 82-84 


The sneer refers to one of Antony's more ridiculous pretensions (though it was taken seriously in his time). Roman noblemen liked to pretend they were descended from the gods and from mythical heroes. The Julian family, of which Julius Caesar was a member, was supposed to have descended from Venus. In similar fashion, the Antonian family, of which Mark Antony was a member, claimed to be descended from Anton, a mythical son of Hercules. Mark Antony himself did everything he could to model himself on the strong man of legend. 
In the end, then, Mark Antony is forced to leave angrily, defeated in the battle of words with Cleopatra. 


Ö the queen of Ptolemy




The scene now shifts to Octavius Caesar's house in Rome. Octavius Caesar is not much better off in Rome than Mark Antony is in Alexandria. He too is beset with problems, and he is annoyed that Mark Antony's inaction makes it necessary for himself to be all the more industrious. He is saying bitterly to Lepidus (the third member of the Triumvirate) as he reads a letter: 


From Alexandria

This is the news: he fishes, drinks, and wastes

The lamps of night in revel; is not more manlike

Than Cleopatra, nor the queen of Ptolemy

More womanly than he;





óAct I, scene iv, lines 3-7 


The phrase "the queen of Ptolemy" brings up an additional point that made Cleopatra unpopular with the Romans. In ancient Egypt it had long been the custom of the Pharaohs to marry their sisters. Since the Pharaonic blood was considered divine, it would not do to have one marry a mortal. Only a woman of the same line was a fit consort. At least, that was the rationalization. 
When the Ptolemies ruled Egypt, they made it a point to adopt as many Egyptian customs as possible, in order to keep the populace quiet. This included brother-sister marriages, and Cleopatra was born of a family that had many times been involved in incest (see page I-185), something that was as repulsive to the Romans as it would be to us. 
In fact, when Cleopatra's father died, Cleopatra and her brother, Ptolemy XII,.were made joint rulers and were, in fact, married. It was expected that eventually they might have offspring who would succeed to the throne. Ptolemy XII, however, died in the course of Julius Caesar's small war in Alexandria in 48 b.c., and Cleopatra's rule was joined with a still younger brother, Ptolemy XIII. 
Ptolemy XIII was only ten years old at the time, and in 44 B.C., when the news of Julius Caesar's assassination reached her, Cleopatra had the boy killed and then ruled jointly with her son, Caesarion, only three years old at the time. The new king was Ptolemy XIV. 
Octavius Caesar's reference to her as "queen of Ptolemy" stressed the fact that she had been married to her brothers, and we can be sure that this was included in the whispering campaign that was conducted against Mark Antony. 


Ö beaten from ModenaÖ




Messages of disaster greet Octavius Caesar as they had greeted Antony. Octavius learns that Sextus Pompeius grows stronger along the coast and that pirates control the sea where Sextus himself does not. Daily Octavius Caesar's control over Rome grows shakier as its food supply dwindles. Octavius Caesar broods resentfully over the fact that he isn't being helped by Antony. Unaware that Antony is on his way westward, Octavius Caesar cries out: 


Antony

Leave thy lascivious wassails. When thou once

Was beaten from Modena, where thou slew'st

Hirtius and Pansa, consuls, at thy heel

Did famine follow, whom thou fough'st against

(Though daintily brought up) with patience more

Than savages could suffer.





óAct I, scene iv, lines 55-61 


The reference is to the period following the assassination of Julius Caesar and deals with events not mentioned in Shakespeare's Julius Caesar. The events fall in the interval between Acts III and IV of that play (see page I-301). 
Decimus Brutus (called "Decius" by Shakespeare) was in control of Cisalpine Gaul in northern Italy, and Mark Antony led an army northward to attack him. Decius fortified himself in Mutina, the modern Modena, 220 miles north of Rome. While Mark Antony fought there, Octavius Caesar, back in Rome, persuaded the Senate to declare war against Antony and to send an army against him led by the consul Hirtius; then another, led by the other consul, Pansa. 
Mark Antony left his brother, Lucius, to conduct the siege of Mutina with part of the army, and then led the remainder against the consuls. Antony was badly defeated, but both Roman consuls were killed. (This was a stroke of luck for Octavius, for with both consuls dead, he was in full control of a victorious army.) 
Antony had to retreat over the Alps into Gaul, and that retreat was attended by extraordinary suffering and hardship. Antony, in one of his better times, shared that suffering with his men and did so with such stoic patience that he endeared himself to the army. The tale of his nobility in this respect was undoubtedly told and retold with exaggeration, as we can see from the repulsive details Shakespeare has Octavius list: 


Thou didst drink

The stale [urine] of horses and the gilded [scum-covered]

puddle Which beasts would cough at.





óAct I, scene iv, lines 61-63 


The demi-Atlas.,.




Back in Alexandria, Cleopatra already misses Antony and is in a state of delicious self-pity. She says: 


Give me to drink mandragora.





óAct I, scene v, line 4 


Mandragora is an older form of "mandrake," a plant of the potato family which is native to the Mediterranean region. It has its uses as a cathartic, emetic, and narcotic. Which effect predominates depends on the dose, but Cleopatra thinks of the narcotic aspect, for when asked why she wants it, she says: 


That I might sleep out this great gap of time

My Antony is away.





óAct I, scene v, lines 5-6 


She thinks longingly of Antony, saying: 


O, Charmian,

Where think'st thou he is now?

Stands he, or sits he?

Or does he walk?

Or is he on his horse?

O happy horse, to bear the weight of Antony!

Do bravely, horse, for wot'st thou whom thou mov'st?

The demi-Atlas of this earth. ..





óAct I, scene v, lines 18-23 


Atlas was one of the Titans who warred against Jupiter (see page I-11). In fact, he may have been their general, for he was punished worse than the others. He was condemned to support the heavens on his shoulders. 
As time went on, it became difficult to picture Atlas as holding up the sky. The Greeks learned more about astronomy and knew that there was no solid sky to support. The notion arose, then, of Atlas supporting the earth rather than the sky. 
Cleopatra pictures Antony here as supporting the weight of the problems of the Roman world. He shared this weight with Octavius Caesar, of course, so he himself was but a demi-Atlas; that is, half an Atlas. 


Ö Phoebus' amorous pinchesÖ




In contrast, the self-pitying Cleopatra seems to herself to be ugly and old. She says:


Think on me,

That am with Phoebus' amorous pinches black

And wrinkled deep in time. Broad-fronted Caesar,

When thou wast here above the ground, I was

A morsel for a monarch; and great Pompey

Would stand and make his eyes grow in my brow;





óAct I, scene v, lines 27-32 


Phoebus is, of course, the sun, and to be black with the sun's pinches would be to be sun-tanned. A queen like Cleopatra, however, would certainly not allow herself to grow sun-tanned. That was for peasant girls. 
What is meant is that she is dark by nature because she dwelt in a tropic land. It is part of the Egyptian-Negress notion of Cleopatra, the usual false picture. 
Nor is she honestly "wrinkled deep in time." At this point in the story, she is twenty-nine years old; past her first youth, perhaps, but by no means old and wrinkled. 
Still it is human for her to think of herself as she was nine years before, only twenty-one, when Julius Caesar knew her; and even earlier when she met not Pompey himself, but his older son, who bore the same name. 


Her opulent throneÖ




But now comes a messenger to Cleopatra from Antony, with the gift of a pearl and with a pretty speech. He says: 


"Say the firm Roman to great Egypt sends

This treasure of an oyster; at whose foot,

To mend the petty present, I will piece

Her opulent throne with kingdoms.

All the East (Say thou) shall call her mistress."





óAct I, scene v, lines 43-46 


The story was indeed spread in Rome that Antony was planning to hand over Roman provinces to Cleopatra; even to make her Queen of Rome (with himself as king, of course); that a foreign ruler would thus raise an exotic throne upon the Capitol. In the end, this, more than anything else, was to embitter Rome against Antony. 
Shakespeare gets a little ahead of history here. The threat of turning the East over to Cleopatra comes later. 
At the moment, Mark Antony and Octavius Caesar, each waist-deep in trouble, were going to have to be friends whether they liked it or not, for only by working together could they survive.
But Cleopatra is not concerned with practical politics now. She is delighted with Mark Antony's remembrance and is ashamed of herself for so much as remembering Julius Caesar and Gnaeus Pompeius. When Charmian teases her with her onetime love of Julius Caesar, she dismisses it with a much quoted line, saying: 


My salad days,

When I was green in judgment, cold in blood,





óAct I, scene v, lines 73-74 


And indeed, one of the most interesting aspects of this play is that it is a paean to the ecstasies of mature love, rather than of the teen-age passions so often celebrated.


Ö every hour in Rome






The second act opens in Messina, Sicily, at the camp of Sextus Pompeius, who is in conversation with his captains, Menecrates and Menas. Sextus is rather euphoric, confident that his hold on Rome's food supply gives him the trump card and that Octavius Caesar and Lepidus can do nothing without Antony's military ability. As for Mark Antony, Sextus has full confidence in Cleopatra's charms. He says:


Mark Antony

In Egypt sits at dinner, and will make

No wars without doors.





óAct II, scene i, lines 11-13 


He is, however, overconfident. Another one of his captains, Varrius, conies with unwelcome news: 


This is most certain, that

I shall deliver: Mark Antony is every hour in Rome

Expected.





óAct II, scene i, lines 28-30 


There is hope, of course, that upon arrival, Mark Antony will fall to quarreling with Octavius. This is tentatively advanced as a possibility by Menas, but Sextus shakes his head. They may have cause enough to quarrel, but as long as the danger from the sea exists, they will have to make friends. At the end of the short scene, things look as bad for Sextus as, at the start, they had looked good. 


Hark, Ventidius




In Rome, in Lepidus' house, it is now late in 40 b.c. The confrontation between Octavius Caesar and Mark Antony is about to take place and poor Lepidus is in a sweat lest the two collide destructively. He has undoubtedly done his best to influence Octavius Caesar to be accommodating, and he pleads with Enobarbus to do the same with respect to Mark Antony. 
From opposite sides approach the two triumvirs, each with friends, and each pretending to be deep in private discussion so that, for effect, he can seem to be ignoring the other. 
Antony speaks first to the general at his side-his thoughts, to all appearances, on military matters in the East: 


// we compose well here, to Parthia.

Hark, Ventidius.





óAct II, scene ii, lines 15-16a 


Here he goes off, apparently, into military talk unheard by the audience and undoubtedly meant to impress Octavius. 
Ventidius is Publius Ventidius Bassus, who in early life had been a poor man who made a living renting mules and carriages. He rose to become a general serving under Julius Caesar in Gaul and remained loyal to Julius Caesar during the war with Pompey. After the assassination of the great Julius, Ventidius served Mark Antony and has remained loyal to him since. 


Maecenas; ask Agrippa




As for Octavius Caesar, he is speaking with two men. Of what we can't say, but it is probably politics. Octavius affects carelessness. All we hear him say is: 


/ do not know, Maecenas; ask Agrippa.





óAct II, scene ii, lines 16b-17 


Maecenas and Agrippa are Octavius Caesar's closest associates, then and afterward. Gaius Cilnius Maecenas was a man of peace. He was several years older than Octavius Caesar and had been a friend of his since the latter was a schoolboy. In later years Maecenas was always left at home to take care of Rome when Octavius Caesar was forced to be away on war or diplomacy. In his eventual retirement, Maecenas used the wealth he had gathered to support and patronize writers and artists. So earnestly did he do this and so great were those he helped that forever after a patron of the arts has been called "a Maecenas."
Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa, on the other hand, was the man of war, the good right arm of Octavius Caesar, the general who fought all his master's battles, and who made it possible for Octavius to win military victories. (Why didn't Agrippa win them for himself? Because he was intelligent enough to know that he needed Octavius' brain to direct his arm. In the same way, Mark Antony needed Julius Caesar's brain to direct his arm, but he never really understood that.) 
Agrippa was the same age as Octavius Caesar, was with him at school when the news of the assassination of Julius Caesar had arrived, and went with him to Italy. He did not play much of a part in the war against the conspirators, for he was still young. After the Battle of Philippi, however, Agrippa began to shine. It was he, for instance, who led the armies that penned up Fulvia and Lucius Antonius in Perusia and then defeated them. 


Ö time to wrangle Ö




Softly and eagerly, Lepidus draws the two men together. Stiffly, they sit and confront each other. Each raises the matter of his grievances. Octavius Caesar has the better of this, for he can bring up the war fought against him by Fulvia and Lucius, claiming Antony set them on. Antony objects that the war was against his own policy, and ungallantly places full blame upon his dead wife, saying, in terms that must have raised a wry smile from many a husband in the audience: 


As for my wife,

I would you had her spirit in such another.

The third o'the world is yours, which with a snaffle

You may pace easy, but not such a wife.





óAct II, scene ii, lines 65-68 


Nevertheless, argumentation continues till Enobarbus roughly points out the necessity of a compromise, however insincere: 


Ö if you borrow one another's love

for the instant, you may, when you hear

no more words of Pompey, return it again:

you shall have time to wrangle in when

you have nothing else to do.





óAct II, scene ii, lines 107-10 


It doesn't make pleasant listening, but it is a fair appraisal of the situation. A practical means of accommodation must be sought.


Admired OctaviaÖ




Agrippa comes up with a suggestion at once. He says to Octavius Caesar: 


Thou hast a sister by the mother's side,

Admired Octavia: great Mark Antony

Is now a widower.





óAct II, scene ii, lines 123-25 


This sounds as though Agrippa is referring to a half sister, but he isn't. Octavia is a daughter of the same mother as Octavius Caesar as well as of the same father. 
Octavius Caesar had two sisters, both older than he. The older one, Octavia Major, was a half sister, by his father's first wife. The second, Octavia Minor, was a full sister and the one to whom Agrippa refers. 
She was by no means a young virgin, but was in her mid-twenties by this time (not much younger than Cleopatra) and had been married since her early teens, bearing two daughters and a son. Her husband, Gaius Marcellus, had died the year before, so what was being proposed was the marriage of a widow and a widower. 
Mark Antony agrees to the marriage and thus is produced what is hoped will be a permanent bond between the two triumvirs, someone who will be a common love and who will labor to smooth over all irritations. There is a precedent for this, in connection with the First Triumvirate, when Pompey and Julius Caesar were much in the position that Mark Antony and Octavius Caesar are now. 
In 58 b.c., when Julius Caesar was leaving for Gaul, he arranged to have Pompey marry Julia, his daughter, who was in her mid-twenties at the time. It turned out to be a love match. Pompey doted on her and while the marriage lasted, peace was maintained between the two men. In 54 b.c., however, Julia died at the age of only thirty. The strongest link between the two men snapped. The civil war that followed might have been prevented had Julia lived. 
It was this precedent which was now being followed. If only Mark Antony could love Octavia as Pompey had loved Julia, all might be well (and better, too, for Octavia was destined to live for thirty years more and was not to die young as Julia had done). 


Ö my sword 'gainst Pompey




The agreement among the triumvirs was aimed particularly against Sextus Pompeius, and this was rather embarrassing to Mark Antony, who says: 


I did not think to draw my sword 'gainst Pompey,

For he hath laid strange courtesies and great

Of late upon me.





óAct II, scene ii, lines 159-61 


It was more than that, in fact. The two were making definite overtures toward an alliance. When Antony's mother fled Italy after the Perusine War, Sextus was ostentatiously kind to her. In fact, in a later scene, Sextus reminds Antony of this, saying: 


When Caesar and your brother were at blows,

Your mother came to Sicily and did find

Her welcome friendly.





óAct II, scene vi, lines 44-46 


Sextus was not doing this, of course, out of sheer goodness of heart. He expected the Perusine War would lead to a greater civil war and he was prepared to choose sides for his own greater benefit. Since Octavius Caesar was closer to himself and the more immediate enemy, he was ready to ally himself with Antony, and this kindness to Antony's mother was a move in that direction. 
Indeed, Antony would have welcomed such an alliance, and in 41 b.c. the first steps toward such an understanding had been taken. Undoubtedly, if it had not been for the terrible Parthian menace, the Sextus-Antony combination would have become reality. As it was, though, Antony had to have peace with Octavius Caesar, and to get that the alliance with Sextus had to be abandoned and even war on Sextus had to be considered. 


Ö Mount Mesena




If the triumvirs were now to turn against Sextus Pompeius, it was none too soon. Sextus had even established strong bases on the shores of Italy itself. Antony asks where he is, and Octavius Caesar answers: 


About the Mount Mesena.





óAct II, scene ii, line 166 


Mount Mesena is a promontory that encloses a harbor about which the ancient town of Misenum was located. That town, now long gone, was fifteen miles west of Naples. In later years, Agrippa was to construct a strong naval base there, but now it belonged to Sextus.


Ö the river of Cydnus




The triumvirs leave, so that Mark Antony might meet Octavia and perform whatever perfunctory rites of courtship might seem advisable. Maecenas and Agrippa remain behind with Enobarbus for a little light conversation. 
Naturally, this means there is a chance for a little leering in connection with Cleopatra. Maecenas and Agrippa want all the inside information from Enobarbus. Enobarbus is only too glad to comply: 


When she first met Mark Antony,

she pursed up his heart, upon the river of Cydnus.





óAct II, scene ii, lines 192-93 


That takes us back to the previous year, 41 b.c., when Antony, in the aftermath of Philippi, had taken over the East and was traveling through Asia Minor, gouging money out of the miserable population for the war against Parthia he was planning. Unfortunately for him, there wasn't much money to be had, squeeze he ever so tightly. Brutus and Cassius had been there the year before (see page I-303) and they had scoured the land clean. 
Antony made his headquarters in Tarsus, a city on the southeastern coast of Asia Minor, at the mouth of the Cydnus River. (In Tarsus, a generation later, St. Paul was to be born.) It seemed to Antony that the logical solution to his dilemma was to squeeze Egypt. That land, nominally independent, but actually a Roman puppet, had the greatest concentration of wealth in the Mediterranean world-wealth wrung out of an endlessly fertile river valley and an endlessly patient and hard-working peasant population. 
There had been reports that Egypt had helped Brutus and Cassius, and this was very likely, for Egypt was in no position to refuse help to any Roman general who was in her vicinity with an army. Mark Antony understood that well, but what interested him was that this help could be used as an excuse to demand money. He planned to demand a great deal, and for that reason he summoned the Queen of Egypt to come to him in Tarsus and explain her actions. He had briefly seen the Queen in Alexandria in the days when Julius Caesar was there, seven years before, but not since. 
Cleopatra, perfectly aware of what Mark Antony intended, and also perfectly aware of his reputation as a woman chaser and of herself as a supreme quarry, decided to come to him in conditions of the greatest possible luxury, with herself beautified to the extreme of art. Plutarch describes the scene well, but Shakespeare improves on it and places it, for greater effect, in the mouth of Enobarbus, the rough soldier, to show that even the least poetic man had to be affected by Cleopatra's unparalleled stage setting of herself. 
Enobarbus, in an unbelievable outburst of sheer lyricism, says: 


The barge she sat in, like a burnished throne,

Burned on the water: the poop was beaten gold;

Purple the sails, and so perfumed that

The winds were lovesick with them; the oars were silver,

Which to the tune of flutes kept stroke and made

The water which they beat to follow faster,

As amorous of their strokes. For her own person,

It beggared all description: she did lie

In her pavilion, cloth-of-gold of tissue,

O'erpicturing that Venus where we see

The fancy outwork nature: on each side her

Stood pretty dimpled boys, like smiling Cupids,

With divers-colored fans, whose wind did seem

To glow the delicate cheeks which they did cool,

And what they undid did.





óAct II, scene ii, lines 197-21 la 


Agrippa, listening, can only mutter in envy: 


O, rare for Antony.





óAct II, scene ii, line 21 1b 


Cleopatra's strategy worked to perfection. Antony found himself sitting at the pier on a throne in Roman state-but utterly alone. He was completely upstaged as everyone crowded to watch the approaching barge. He himself was overcome. When Cleopatra invited him on board the barge, he went in what was almost a hypnotic trance, and was her slave from that moment. The Parthians were forgotten until they charged into the Eastern provinces and forced themselves upon Antony's unwilling notice. 


Age cannot wither Ö




Agrippa and Maecenas grow uneasy at the description. The entire accommodation of the triumvirs rests upon the stability of the marriage of Antony and Octavia. Maecenas points out that now Antony must leave her, but Enobarbus answers in an immediate and positive negative; composing in the process the most effective description of complete feminine charm the world of literature has to offer. He says of the possibility of Antony's leaving Cleopatra: 


Never; he will not;

Age cannot wither her, nor custom stale

Her infinite variety: other women cloy

The appetites they feed, but she makes hungry

Where most she satisfies; for vilest things

Become themselves in her, that the holy priests

Bless her when she is riggish.





óAct II, scene ii, lines 240-46 


And what can the others offer in place of this? Maecenas can only say, rather lamely: 


// beauty, wisdom, modesty, can settle

The heart of Antony, Octavia is

A blessed lottery to him.





óAct II, scene ii, lines 247-49 


Thy daemon Ö




Antony pledges himself to Octavia, but on leaving her and Octavius Caesar, he encounters the soothsayer, who has apparently accompanied his train to Italy. Antony asks whose fortune will rise higher, his own or Octavius Caesar's. The soothsayer answers: 


Caesar's.

Therefore,

O Antony, stay not by his side.

Thy daemon, that thy spirit which keeps thee, is

Noble, courageous, high, unmatchable,

Where Caesar's is not. But near him thy angel

Becomes afeared, as being o'erpow'red: therefore

Make space enough between you.





óAct II, scene iii, lines 18-24 


The Greeks came to believe that with each individual was associated a divine spirit through which the influence of the gods could make itself felt. It was when this influence was most strongly felt that a man could attain heights otherwise impossible to him. Where a particular spirit was most continually effective, the man himself would be of unusual power and ability. In some cases, this belief was elaborated to the point where each individual was thought to have two such spirits, one for good and one for evil, the two continually fighting for mastery. 
To the Greeks, such a spirit was a "daimon" (meaning "divinity") and in the Latin spelling this became "daemon." To the later Christians these daemons, being of pagan origin, could only be evil, and therefore we get our present "demon," meaning an evil spirit However, the Greek notion lives on with but a change of name, and. we still speak of guardian angels and we sometimes even envisage an individual as being influenced by his better or worse nature. 
The soothsayer is saying that though Octavius Caesar's daemon is inferior to Antony's it can nevertheless win over the latter. In present parlance, we might say that Octavius Caesar plays in luck whenever he encounters Mark Antony. And yet this is hard to accept. It wasn't luck that kept Octavius Caesar on top through all a long life, but ability. 
The Latin equivalent, by the way, of the Greek daimon was "genius" (see page I-118). 


I'th'EastÖ




The soothsayer, in warning Antony to stay far away from Octavius Caesar, is but telling Antony what he wants to hear. (This is the supreme art of the soothsayer in all ages and places.) Antony therefore says, after the soothsayer leaves: 


I will to Egypt:

And though I make this marriage for my peace,

I'th'East my pleasure lies.





óAct II, scene iii, lines 39-4la 


Eventually, yes, but right now he can't. There are problems he must attend to and until those are resolved, he must remain married to Octavia and must stay out of Egypt 
And some of the problems are in the East and won't wait for his personal presence. His general, Ventidius, comes on scene, and Antony says: 


O, come, Ventidius,

You must to Parthia. Your commission's ready:

Follow me, and receive't.





óAct II, scene iii, lines 41b-43 


Ö be at Mount




If the Parthians must be dealt with, so must Sextus Pompeius. He was the nearer and the more immediate menace. 
The new agreement between the triumvirs and, in particular, Antony's betrayal of his earlier moves toward an alliance had embittered Sextus, and he now escalated his own offensive. In the whiter of 40-39 b.c. Sextus' hand about Rome's throat tightened. Virtually no food entered the capital city and famine threatened. When the triumvirs tried to calm the populace, they were stoned. 
They had no choice but to try to come to an agreement with Sextus and to allow him to enter the combine. This would make four men (a quad-rumvirate) in place of three. To discuss this, the triumvirs agreed to come to Misenum, Sextus' stronghold, to confer with him. 
Shakespeare skips over the hard winter, passing directly from Antony's marriage to Octavia to the moment when the triumvirs are leaving for Misenum. Lepidus, Maecenas, and Agrippa come on scene in a whirlwind of activity, and Maecenas says: 


We shall

As I conceive the journey, be at

Mount Before you, Lepidus.





óAct II, scene iv, lines 5-7 


The "Mount" is the Misenum promontory where the meeting with Sextus will take place. 


Ö his sword Phillipan




Back in Alexandria during that same whiter, Cleopatra spends a moody, restless time. She longs for the period of happiness she had experienced with Antony and says, in reminiscence, to Charmian: 


/ laughed him out of patience; and that night

I laughed him into patience; and next morn,

Ere the ninth hour, I drunk him to his bed;

Then put my tires and mantles on him, whilst

I wore his sword Philippan.





óAct II, scene v, lines 19-23 


Cleopatra may laugh with delight as she remembers, but the picture of Antony drunk by midafternoon (the ninth hour of a twelve-hour day would be about 3 p.m.) and snoring red-faced while wearing women's clothes was undoubtedly the sort of thing Octavian propaganda was scattering all over Rome to the scandal of all good citizens. 
It was the fashion of warriors in medieval legend to give names to their swords. The best-known example is that of King Arthur's Excalibur. Mark Antony's sword, Philippan, is named for the Battle of Philippi- Antony's greatest victory. 


Ö a Fury crowned with snakes




Clearly, Cleopatra has not heard the news about Octavia and a frightened Messenger comes in to deliver it. 
The Messenger begins by assuring Cleopatra that Antony is well, but he hesitates and the Queen senses that something is wrong. Yet he does not seem sufficiently distraught to be bringing news of death at that. She says to him, concerning his news: 


// not well,

Thou shouldst come like a

Fury crowned with snakes,





óAct II, scene v, lines 39-40 


The Greeks included in their myths three terrible goddesses, the Erinyes ("angry ones"), whose task it was to pursue and madden those who were guilty of particularly terrible crimes, such as the slaying of close kinsmen. They were depicted and described as so ferocious in appearance that the mere sight was maddening. They carried snakes in their hands, or else their hair was made up of living, writhing snakes. (Perhaps they symbolized the raging of conscience.) 
To avoid offending them, the Greeks sometimes spoke of them by the euphemistic term "Eumenides" ("the kindly ones"). Aeschylus wrote a powerful play by that name, dealing with part of the Agamemnon myth. Agamemnon (see page I-89) is killed by his wife Clytemnestra on his return from Troy. To avenge his father, Agamemnon's son, Orestes, kills his mother and is pursued by the Erinyes in consequence. 
The Romans called these fell goddesses "Furiae," from their word for raging madness, and the word is "Furies" in English. 


Ö the feature of Octavia Ö




The Messenger finally blurts out the news of Antony's marriage to Octavia. Cleopatra falls into a towering rage and beats the Messenger, shouting horrible imprecations upon him:


Hence,

Horrible villain! Or I'll spurn thine eyes

Like balls before me: I'll unhair thy head,

Thou shalt be whipped with wire and stewed in brine,

Smarting in ling'ring pickle.





óAct II, scene v, lines 62-66 


The whole scene, properly done, shows Cleopatra in a spitting, fantastic fury, and one can only feel that such rage would make Cleopatra the more attractive to Antony ("vilest things become themselves in her"). Compared with that, the gentle and modest Octavia must have seemed utterly pallid and insipid to Antony, in bed as well as out. 
(I cannot resist repeating the story of the two respectable English matrons who were viewing a showing of Antony and Cleopatra a century ago, in the reign of Queen Victoria. When this scene passed its shattering course upon the stage, one of the matrons turned to the other and whispered in a most shocked manner: "How different from the home life of our own dear Queen!") 
But Cleopatra's rage does not entirely wipe out her shrewdness. She questions the trembling Messenger yet again to make sure there is no possibility of mistake and says to him bitterly when the news is confirmed again and yet again: 


Hadst thou Narcissus in thy face, to me

Thou wouldst appear most ugly.





óAct II, scene v, lines 96-97 


Narcissus is, of course, the lovely youth, irresistible to women, who fell in love with his own reflection (see page I-10). 
With that settled, and the Messenger retiring, Cleopatra ponders her next step. She orders a courtier to go after the Messenger and question him further: 


Go to the fellow, good Alexas; bid him

Report the feature of Octavia; her years,

Her inclination, let him not leave out

The color of her hair.





óAct II, scene v, lines 111-14 


Thou dost o'ercount meÖ




The scene shifts to Misenum, where the triumvirs meet with Sextus. There is an exchange of hostages, threats, harsh language from either side.
Mark Antony tells Sextus that on land the triumvirs "o'ercount" (outnumber) him. Sextus responds sardonically: 


At land indeed

Thou dost o'ercount me of my father's house:





óAct II, scene vi, lines 26-27 


Here the word "o'ercount" is used in an alternate sense, meaning "cheat." The reference is to a house Antony had bought of Pompey the Great once and had then never paid for, since the civil war between Pompey and Julius Caesar intervened. Civil wars always end in enrichment for the victors at the expense of the losers. 


Ö wheat to Rome




Octavius Caesar, however, coldly keeps his temper, and his steady urging of the real point causes Sextus Pompeius to bring up a suggested compromise. Sextus says: 


You have made me offer

Of Sicily, Sardinia; and I must

Rid all the sea of pirates; then, to send

Measures of wheat to Rome;





óAct II, scene vi, lines 34-37 


In actual fact, the offer was rather more generous than that. Sextus Pompeius already had Sicily, but to it was added not only Sardinia, but Corsica also, and these three large islands half encircle Italy. In addition, since all these were taken from Octavius Caesar's share of the realm, Sextus was to have Greece as well, so that Antony had to pocket a share of the loss. 
In return for becoming the fourth man of the group, Sextus would have to take his hand from Rome's throat. 


Ö Apollodorus carried




Sextus Pompeius accepts the compromise and all the parties fall to shaking hands and expressing affection, though Antony, as always, finds he must be the target of a continual lewd curiosity on the part of the others concerning Cleopatra. 
Sextus brings up the famous story of how Cleopatra first met Julius Caesar. He says:


And I have heard Apollodorus carried-





óAct II, scene vi, line 68 


It had been Apollodorus, a Sicilian Greek, who had delivered the rolled-up carpet containing Cleopatra (possibly nude) to Julius Caesar. Clearly, to bring up tales of Cleopatra's earlier amours could scarcely be calculated to please Antony, and Enobarbus manages to quiet Sextus and head him off. 


Thy father, Pompey. ..




Not everyone is satisfied. When the chief characters leave, Menas, one of Sextus' captains, remains behind with Enobarbus. Menas mutters to himself: 


Thy father, Pompey, would ne'er have made this treaty.





óAct II, scene vi, lines 82-83 


The implication is that Sextus' father, Pompey the Great, would have had too much military and political sense to give up the trump card (starving Rome) for so little, but would have driven a much harder bargain. In this respect, Menas was being more sentimental than accurate, for Pompey the Great had been a poor politician and would undoubtedly have agreed to such a treaty or a worse one. 
Later, Menas is frank enough to put the matter even more strongly to Enobarbus: 


For my part, I am sorry it is turned to a drinking.

Pompey doth this day laugh away his fortune.





óAct II, scene vi, lines 104-5 


The accuracy of Menas' judgment would make itself evident soon enough. 


Ö holy, cold and still. ..




But then Menas too starts probing for information about Cleopatra and is thunderstruck when Enobarbus tells him Antony is married to Octavia. Surely, this can only be a marriage of convenience. 
Enobarbus agrees: 


I think so, too. But you shall find the band that seems to tie

their friendship together will be the very strangler of their amity:

Octavia is of a holy, cold and still conversation.





óAct II, scene vi, lines 120-23 


Clearly, Enobarbus doesn't think this is the sort of thing that will hold a man like Antony. He says, confidently: 


He will to his Egyptian dish again.





óAct II, scene vi, line 126


Ö the flow o'th'Nile






The quadrumvirs are on Sextus' galley off Misenum, having a grand time, and are hilarious over their wine. Antony is in his element; he can carry his liquor better than any of them and, as an expert on Egypt, a strange and exotic land, he can regale the others with wonders. He says: 


Thus do they, sir: they take the flow o'th'Nile

By certain scales i'th'pyramid. They know

By th'height, the lowness, or the mean, if dearth

Or foison [plenty] follow. The higher Nilus swells,

The more it promisesÖ





óAct II, scene vii, lines 17-21 


Antony is correct here. The Egyptian priesthood kept a careful watch on the changes in the level of the Nile and through long records had learned to forecast from early variations what the final flood level would be and from that what the likelihood of a particularly poor harvest might be. Such studies had also made the Egyptians aware of the 365-day cycle of the seasons very early in their history and had given them an accurate solar calendar, while other civilizations of the time had struggled with the much more complicated lunar calendars. 
The pyramids were not, however, used as scales for the level of the Nile. Throughout history, people have wondered at the uses of the pyramids and have been reluctant to accept the fact that those monstrous piles were merely elaborate tombs. They have been accused of every other purpose but that, and some moderns have considered them the repository of the wisdom of the ages, a means of forecasting the future, and an early method of launching spaceships. But they are tombs, just the same, and nothing more.


Your serpent of Egypt.. .




Lepidus is gloriously drunk; drunk enough to wish to shine as an Egyptian authority himself. He says with enormous gravity: 


Your serpent of Egypt is bred now of your mud

by the opera tion of your sun; so is your crocodile.





óAct II, scene vii, lines 26-28 


This represents the ancient belief in "spontaneous generation," the thought that unwanted or noxious species of plants or animals arise of themselves from dead or decaying matter. (How else explain the prevalence of these species despite human efforts to wipe them out.) 
Antony humors the drunken Lepidus by agreeing with him, but it is quite certain that the Egyptians knew that serpents and crocodiles developed from eggs laid by the adult female. The eggs were quite large enough to see. 
The situation was less certain with creatures that laid eggs small enough to overlook. It was not until half a century after Shakespeare's death that it was shown that maggots did not arise from dead meat, but from tiny eggs laid on that dead meat by flies. And it wasn't till the mid-nineteenth century that it was shown that microscopic creatures did not arise from dead matter but only from other living microscopic creatures. 
Lepidus goes on to deliver a piece of egregious patronization. He says: 


Ö I have heard the Ptolemies' pyramises

are very goodly things; without contradiction

I have heard that.





óAct II, scene vii, lines 35-37


Of course, they were not the Ptolemies' pyramises (or pyramids, as we would say) except in the sense that they were to be found in the land ruled by them. They were built by native Egyptian Pharaohs who ruled more than two thousand years before the first Ptolemy mounted the Egyptian throne. They were as ancient to the Ptolemies as the Ptolemies are to us.
And "goodly things"? Yes indeed. Considering the technology of the tune, the pyramids are the most colossal labors of man the planet has seen, with the possible exception of the Great Wall of China. They impress us now even in their rains as mere piles of huge granite blocks. When they were new, they had white limestone facings that gleamed smoothly and brightly in the sun and were surrounded by enormous temple complexes. 
The Greeks, who notoriously admired no culture but their own, humbly included these non-Greek structures among their Seven Wonders of the World; and of all the Seven Wonders only the pyramids still remain. 
Antony cannot resist poking fun at the besotted Lepidus, describing the crocodile in grave but non-informative phrases, ending in the portentous: 


Ö and the tears of it are wet.





óAct II, scene vii, line 51 


Any mention of crocodiles would irresistibly bring tears to mind, for the most famous (but thoroughly untrue) legend concerning the crocodile is that it sheds tears over its prey while swallowing it. Hence the expression "crocodile tears" for hypocritical sorrow. 


Ö lord of all the world




Menas, meanwhile, has been whispering to Sextus Pompeius and pulling at his sleeve. Sextus, who is enjoying the nonsense at the table, is unwilling to leave and follows Menas only with reluctance. 
Once to one side, Menas whispers: 


Wilt thou be lord of all the world?




óAct II, scene vii, line 63 


The half-drunken Sextus stares in surprise and Menas is forced to explain: 


These three world-sharers, these competitors,

Are in thy vessel. Let me cut the cable;

And when we are put off, fall to their throats.

All there is thine.




óAct II, scene vii, lines 72-75 


Sextus, sobered by the suggestion, is tempted, but then says, sorrowfully: 


Ah, this thou shouldst have done,

And not have spoke on't.

In me 'tis villainy,

In thee't had been good service.




óAct II, scene vii, lines 75-77 


This story is told by Plutarch and yet I wonder if it can be true. It is conceivable that the thought would have occurred to Menas and that
Sextus might have shrunk from the perfidiousness of the deed. But is it conceivable that the triumvirs would have placed themselves in Sextus' grasp without taking precautions against just such an act? If Lepidus were too stupid to foresee the possibility and Antony too careless, I would not believe it of Octavius. He would not step into the lion's jaw without some sort of rod so placed as to hold that jaw firmly open. 
However, the story is a good one, true or false, and I would hate to lose it, particularly since it displays so neatly the exact moment when Sextus Pompeius reached and passed the peak of his power. 


Ö my brave emperor




Octavius Caesar is the only one who is reluctant to drink. He cannot carry his liquor well and he does not enjoy losing his iron control of himself. The rough Enobarbus says to him with some irony: 


Ha, my brave emperor!

Shall we dance now the

Egyptian bacchanals

And celebrate our drink?





óAct II, scene vii, lines 105-7 


The word "emperor" is from the Latin imperator, meaning "commander." It was a title given a successful general by his troops. It was one of the titles granted Julius Caesar by the Senate. He was not merely one of many imperators; he was the imperator of the Roman armies as a whole- the generalissimo. 
Octavius Caesar eventually received the title too, and since control of the army was, at bottom, the secret of the control of the Roman state, his position as "Roman Imperator" was crucial. Through distortion we know the title as "Roman Emperor," and the state became the "Roman Empire." 
Enobarbus uses the term "emperor" in its less exalted but more accurate aspect as "commander." Both Octavius Caesar and Mark Antony are referred to now and then throughout the play as "emperor." 


Ö darting ParthiaÖ




While Sextus Pompeius is being alcoholically neutralized in the West, Parthia is being defeated outright in the East. Leaving Antony in Italy, Ventidius sailed to Asia Minor, where in 39 b.c. he drove the Roman renegade Labienus into the eastern mountains and there defeated and killed him. 
The Parthian army, under Pacorus, the son of King Orodes, still occupied Syria and Judea, however. In 38 b.c. Ventidius took his army to Syria and defeated the Parthians in three separate battles (and it was only after this was done that Herod could take his throne in Jerusalem). 
In the last of the three victories over Parthia, Pacorus himself was slain. That last battle was fought (according to the story) on the fifteenth anniversary of the fateful day on which Crassus had lost his army at the Battle of Carrhae. 
The third act opens, then, a year after the gay celebration at Misenum, with Ventidius returning in triumph from these wars. The dead body of the Parthian prince is being carried along with the army and Ventidius says: 


Now, darting Parthia, art thou struck; and now

Pleased fortune does of Marcus Crassus' death

Make me revenger. Bear the King's son's body

Before our army. Thy Pacorus, Orodes,

Pays this for Marcus Crassus.





óAct III, scene i, lines 1-5 


Parthia is called "darting" because of its reliance on archers in its battles. The Parthian arrows were their most effective weapon. 


Ö Media, MesopotamiaÖ




Ventidius' aide, Silius, eagerly urges the general to pursue the enemy, to follow up the victory crushingly, and put an end to the Parthian menace forever. He says: 


Spur through Media,

Mesopotamia, and the shelters whither

The routed fly.





óAct III, scene i, lines 7-9 


Mesopotamia ("between the rivers") is the name given by the Greeks to the upper portion of the Tigris-Euphrates valley. It was the area within which Crassus had fought and died. The Romans struggled to grasp and hold it for centuries after Crassus' time, and from time to time succeeded. Nearly seven centuries went by before the region passed definitively out of their hands. 
Media lay immediately to the east of Mesopotamia. It had been controlled by the Persians, conquered by Alexander the Great, and ruled by the early Seleucids, but at no time, then or later, could Roman force extend itself so far.


I have done enoughÖ




Ventidius resists the temptation to continue the war. He might argue that a limited victory is safest. History is full of generals who could have gained greatly through initial victories and then went on to grasp for too much and to lose all. Adolf Hitler of Germany is only the latest example of this. 
There have been exceptions, of course; Alexander the Great being the most notorious. It is hard to say how many generals have been lured to destruction by the specter of Alexander and by the fact that they themselves were not the military genius he was. 
Ventidius does not advance such reasonable military grounds. He prefers instead to answer with the wisdom of the practical politician. 


O Silius, Silius

I have done enough: a lower place, note well,

May make too great an act. For learn this, Silius,

Better to leave undone, than by our deed

Acquire too high a fame when him we serve's away.





óAct III, scene i, lines 11-15 


Perhaps this is true in Antony's case, and if so it is another weakness of his. Since military valor was Antony's great recommendation, he could not endure having his subordinates display too much of it, lest people decide they can do without Antony. 
Octavius Caesar had no difficulty of this sort. He was no military man, but he was a political genius. His generals could cover themselves with glory in his name for all he, or anyone, would care-as long as they followed his orders and left the political machinations to him. 


Ö to Athens Ö




As the Parthian menace is ended, at least temporarily, in victory, so the difficulties with Sextus Pompeius are ended, at least temporarily, in compromise. The quadrumvirs are separating and Mark Antony must go east again to look after his affairs. But still not to Alexandria. He must yet maintain peace with Octavius Caesar and that means maintaining the marriage with Octavia. 
In Syria the victorious Ventidius has heard of Antony's move. He says to Silius: 


He [Antony] purposeth to AthensÖ





óAct III, scene i, line 35


Athens was no longer the great warlike power it had been in the time of Alcibiades and Timon (see page I-140) four centuries before. While its fleet had been in being, it was a city to be reckoned with, but its last fleet had been destroyed at the Battle of Amorgos (an island in the Aegean Sea) in 322 b.c. 
After that, it was at the mercy of the Macedonians and could at best only wriggle a bit when Macedon was in trouble. In 146 b.c. all of Greece, including Athens, came under direct Roman control as the province of Achaea, and the last vestige of Athenian independence was gone. 
Yet Athens could, and did, make one last gamble. In 88 b.c. the kingdom of Pontus in the northeastern stretches of Asia Minor under its able king, Mithradates VI, attacked Rome. Rome was having internal troubles and was caught flat-footed. The Pontine blitz captured all of Asia Minor. For a wild moment, Greece thought that the Greek-speaking Pontines would lead the way to Greek freedom once more. Athens declared for Pontus and moved into opposition against Rome. 
Rome, however, sent its able and ruthless general, Sulla, eastward. He laid siege to Athens, quite without regard to its past glories, and Mithradates of Pontus was utterly unable to send help. In 86 b.c. Athens was taken and sacked and that was the final end. Never again, throughout ancient times, was Athens ever to take any independent political or military action. It settled down to the utter quiet of a university town and for two and a half centuries it was to know complete peace at the price of complete stagnation. 
It is to somnolent Athens that Antony now comes and it is there he will stay, with Octavia, for over two years. 
This is too long a time for the purposes of the play, of course, since Shakespeare is anxious to show the love affair between Antony and Cleopatra to follow an absolutely irresistible course. He must therefore give the impression that Antony's connection with Octavia is fleeting. 
To do this, there is a scene, following that which involves Ventidius, which shows Antony leaving with Octavia for Athens, and then, immediately afterward, one which shows Cleopatra still questioning the Messenger who brought her news of the marriage. 
While tremendous events are transpiring in the outside world-a year of campaigning in Parthia and Syria, a year of negotiation in Italy-it is yet the same day in Cleopatra's palace. She is still planning to win Antony back from Octavia, and the Messenger, well knowing what is expected of him, gladly describes Octavia as short, round-faced, with a low forehead and a shambling walk.


New wars 'gainst PompeyÖ




Antony's establishment of his capital in Athens is, in itself, an invitation to more trouble. It was part of the compromise agreement with Sextus that the latter be given Greece as one of his provinces. Antony never lived up to that part of the bargain and may have deliberately come to Athens to make sure that Greece remained his. 
Once Sextus realized that Antony was not going to keep his part of the treaty, he was naturally infuriated, and once again began his offensive against Rome's food supply. The pact of Misenum was in ruins before it really got a chance to work. 
Shakespeare mentions none of this. When he turns to Antony's house in Athens, he pictures Antony as infuriated at events in Italy and placing all the blame for the renewed trouble on Octavius Caesar. Antony is saying angrily to Octavia, concerning her brother: 


Ö he hath waged

New wars 'gainst Pompey; made his will, and read it

To public ear; Spoke scantly of me Ö





óAct III, scene iv, lines 3-6 


Naturally, Octavius must fight Sextus again; when Sextus begins to stop the grain shipments, Octavius has no choice but to regard it as an invitation to war. 
Since Sextus' pretext is the withholding of Greece, which is Antony's act, Octavius Caesar can scarcely keep from suspecting that Antony is behind Sextus; that the two have an understanding. He therefore renews the propaganda offensive against Antony ("spoke scantly of me"). 
Furthermore, Octavius Caesar shored up his own popularity with the Romans by preparing a will donating money and property to the people in case of his death. He carefully let that will be made public. (Mark Antony once read Julius Caesar's will to the public, see page I-295, and he knows well how powerful a weapon a proper will can be.) 
Antony might not have been so angry if Octavius Caesar's struggle with Sextus Pompeius had gone badly for the former. The situation had changed from what it was before, however. When Sextus closed off Rome's life line he found out why Menas had been opposed to the compromise agreement at Misenum. Octavius had used the respite to stock Rome and to fill its storehouses. It would take a long time before it could be choked once more and meanwhile Octavius could strike back. Sextus found that while Antony and Octavius could easily undo their part of the agreement, he could not undo his; he could not withdraw the food he had allowed into Rome.
It was still necessary to fight Sextus, however, even if Rome was not starving. Octavius Caesar twice sent out ships to fight Sextus, and twice Sextus' hardened sea fighters won. 
Octavius Caesar therefore set to work in earnest. He placed Agrippa in charge and ordered him to build a fleet. Through the whole of 38 and 37 b.c., Agrippa was hard at work on this project, and Antony did not like it. The last thing he wanted was an Octavian victory at sea, for that would mean that Octavius Caesar would be free to turn to the East and would have a fleet to do it with. 
Antony's impulse, then, is to engage in open hostilities, now, while Sextus can still be his ally and while Octavius is still without real power at sea. (Antony himself can always have the Egyptian fleet at his disposal, in addition to his own ships.) 


Yourself shall go between's. ..




Now conies time for the purpose of the marriage of Octavia to show itself. Octavia pleads for peace between husband and brother and urges Antony to let her serve as peacemaker. Antony agrees, saying: 


Ö as you requested,

Yourself shall go between's: the meantime, lady,

I'll raise the preparation of a war

Shall stain your brother.





óAct III, scene iv, lines 24-27 


Octavia may try to make the peace, then, but if she fails, Antony will make war. Actually, she succeeded. She met her brother and managed to arrange another meeting between Antony and Octavius Caesar at Tarentum in southern Italy in 37 b.c. Peace between them continued. 
So much the worse for Antony, however, and the marriage with Octavia proved a disaster for him. The peace she arranged was one in which Antony agreed to, and did, suspend his preparations for war; and in which Octavius Caesar agreed to, but did not, suspend his own preparations for sea mastery. In the interval of peace between the triumvirs, Octavius Caesar continued to build his fleet 


Ö wars upon Pompey




Shakespeare skips this second reconciliation altogether. Immediately after the scene with Octavia in which she is sent off as mediator, Enobarbus and another of Antony's captains, Eros, rush in to discuss military matters. Eros has news, and says: 


Caesar and Lepidus have made wars upon Pompey.





óAct III, scene v, lines 4-5 


This sounds like the same wars that Antony has been complaining about in the previous scene, especially since Enobarbus responds by saying: 


This is old.





óAct III, scene v, line 6 


Actually, it is a new war, begun after Octavia has brought about the meeting at Tarentum and the reconciliation. 
On July 1, 36 b.c., Agrippa's new fleet set out in three squadrons, Agrippa at the head of one, Octavius of a second, and Lepidus of a third. For two months these ships and those of Sextus met, with victory usually resting with Sextus. At one point, Octavius' squadron was nearly wiped out. 
Finally, on September 3, 36 B.C., Sextus was forced to accept battle with Agrippa near the Strait of Messina, which separates Sicily and Italy. This time Sextus was defeated by sea and land, and his power was utterly destroyed. He managed to get away himself and fled eastward, hoping to find safety with Antony. 


Ö denied him rivality Ö




Antony could now see into what catastrophe Octavia's mediation had led him. Octavius Caesar had beaten Sextus and Antony had lost his chance to make vigorous war against Octavius in combination with Sextus. Making that same war without Sextus and with Octavius equipped now with a victorious navy was another, and worse, matter altogether. 
Nor was this the full extent to which matters had turned against Antony. Eros has more news, about Lepidus: 


Caesar, having made use of him [Lepidus] in the wars

'gainst Pompey, presently denied him rivality,

would not let him partake in the glory of the action;

and not resting here, accuses him

of letters he had formerly wrote to Pompey;

upon his own appeal, seizes him;

so the poor third is up, till death enlarge his confine.





óAct III, scene v, lines 7-13 


What happened was that after Sextus Pompeius was defeated, Octavius Caesar added all the conquered areas (Sicily, Sardinia, Corsica, and so on) to the provinces controlled by himself. Lepidus, who controlled only Africa, felt that since he had shared in the fighting, he ought to get some of the loot. This Octavius Caesar refused ("would not let him partake in the glory of the action"). 
Lepidus attempted to use force but this Octavius Caesar scotched at once. He entered Lepidus' camp with a small body of troops, sure that Lepidus' portion of the army would not support their general (probably he had made arrangements with Lepidus' troops in advance). He was right. Lepidus' men deserted him. 
Lepidus was therefore demoted from his triumviral status and Africa was taken from him. He was not imprisoned, however, for he was not that dangerous. He was sent back to Rome and was allowed to keep the purely honorary title of Pontifex Maximus ("high priest"), in which role he had many harmless duties to perform. He kept the job for the remaining quarter century of his life and never bothered anyone again. 


And threats the throatÖ




Octavius Caesar is now without a rival in the West. He rules all the provinces and is stronger than ever before. Antony, who had lost his chance for effective military action, can now only rage. Eros describes his actions: 


He's walking in the garden-thus, and spurns

The rush that lies before him; cries "Fool Lepidus!"

And threats the throat of that his officer

That murd'red Pompey.





óAct III, scene v, lines 17-20 


Sextus Pompeius, fleeing from the lost battle near Sicily, had gone first to the Aegean island of Lesbos, and then to Asia Minor. There he had been taken by a contingent of Antony's troops, and the officer in charge, assuming him to be an enemy, killed him. That was the end of Sextus Pompeius, just three years after he might have been the lord of all the world by merely cutting a hawser first and then three throats. 
The officer who killed Sextus had acted hastily, however. He still had his name and he might have been a most useful pawn to Antony against Octavius. Now he was gone and Antony could only curse the excess zeal of his own loyal officer. 
The situation in 36 b.c., then, was this. From a quadrumvirate there had come a diumvirate-two men, Octavius Caesar and Mark Antony.
The disappearance of the other two, Lepidus and Sextus, had resulted in their strength being added entirely to that of Octavius. 


In Alexandria.. .




Between the scene just described and the next, there is a historical lapse of two years, which Shakespeare passes over in silence, though they are eventful. 
For one thing, Antony, thoroughly disillusioned with the political effect of the marriage with Octavia, left her. The marriage had served Octavius Caesar's purpose only. 
In 36 b.c., therefore, he left Athens and returned to Alexandria. He abandoned Octavia and returned to Cleopatra, whom he had not seen in three years. He was forty-seven years old now, and she was thirty-three, and from this point on to the end of their lives, nothing came between them. 
Of course, there were still world affairs to deal with. Antony could expect no further agreements with Octavius Caesar. There was going to be war as soon as one or the other felt strong enough to push it. 
Antony wanted the strength and to get it he turned and pushed against the Parthians. In a way, this was wasteful, for Antony was turning away from the main enemy (at the moment) and expending energy on a lesser foe. Perhaps we can see his reasoning, thoughÖ 
Octavius Caesar had won considerable military prestige through his victory over Sextus (even though the credit belonged to Agrippa), and since military prestige was Antony's chief stock in trade he had to balance that gain somehow. The Parthians were still reeling from Ventidius' strokes and might be an easy prey. Then too, once they were beaten, Antony could face westward without having to worry about his rear. 
Without provocation, then, Antony opened a campaign against the Parthians and proceeded to do what Ventidius had refused to do. He pursued the Parthians deep into their own fastnesses. 
For his pains, he was trapped in the mountains and was able to escape only with the loss of more than half his army. It was almost as bad a defeat as Crassus had suffered and only the fact that he himself did not die as Crassus had done obscured the fact. 
The next year, 35 b.c., he tried to retrieve matters by attacking Armenia, a much weaker adversary than Parthia. Here he won, capturing the King and bringing him back to Alexandria, where he celebrated a mock triumph. (A real triumph would have had to take place in Rome.) 
Antony had returned to Alexandria with his military reputation much tarnished as a result of his Eastern adventure, rather than made glistening as he had hoped. Had he come back an easy and glorious victor over Parthia he might well have turned against Octavius at once. As it was, he seems to have decided in favor of settling for half. 
He would build an Eastern empire about Egypt as a base and with Alexandria as its capital. He would assume a defensive stance and await events. In doing so, however, he could not help assuming the posture of an Egyptian king. 
After all, life with Cleopatra had become a settled thing. She had had twin children-a boy and a girl-soon after he had left her, back in 40 b.c. Now he recognized them as his. They were named Alexander Helios ("the sun") and Cleopatra Selene ("the moon"). He even married Cleopatra with all solemnity, and the marriage was recognized as valid in the provinces controlled by him, even though he was still married to Octavia. (He didn't formally divorce Octavia till 32 b.c.) 
It was at this point, too, that he began to hand over Roman territory to Cleopatra, as he had earlier promised. 
Octavius, who had been continuing to build his strength in the West and had been preparing public opinion for an offensive against the East, found all this a godsend. 
It is here that Shakespeare takes up the story. Immediately after the scene in which the fate of Lepidus and Sextus is described, the scene shifts to Rome, where Octavius Caesar is describing Antony's activity to Maecenas: 


Contemning Rome, he has done all this and more In Alexandria.

Here's the manner oft: I 'th'marketplace on a tribunal silvered,

Cleopatra and himself in chairs of gold

Were publicly enthroned; at the feet sat Caesarian,

whom they call my father's son,

And all the unlawful issue that their lust

Since then hath made between them. Unto her

He gave the stablishment of Egypt; made her

Of lower Syria, Cyprus, Lydia, Absolute queen.





óAct III, scene vi, lines 1-11 


Caesarion is, of course, the reputed son of Julius Caesar. Julius Caesar was the great-uncle of Octavius Caesar, actually, but in his will Julius had adopted Octavius as his son, and Octavius therefore always refers to Julius as his father. (A good propaganda point, of course.) 
In a way, Antony was restoring to Cleopatra territory that had belonged to the Ptolemies at the peak of their power two centuries before. He also restored Cyrene (which Shakespeare does not mention), which Rome had annexed in 96 b.c.
What's more, their children are also endowed. Octavius Caesar goes on to say: 


His sons he there proclaimed the kings of kings:

Great Media, Parthia, and Armenia

He gave to Alexander;

to Ptolemy he assigned Syria, Cilicia, and Phoenicia.





óAct III, scene vi, lines 12-16 


This is not as bad as it sounds. Alexander is Alexander Helios, who at this time (34 b.c.) was six years old. The kingdoms he was given were not really Roman, so that they represented a phantom rule. Ptolemy (that is, Caesarion, who is called Ptolemy XIV) received lands that had once been Ptolemaic. 
However, we can be sure that Octavius Caesar made the most of Antony's rash family-centered actions. He made it seem to the Roman populace that Antony was giving away Roman provinces to a powerful foreign queen. What's more, he had made himself king (hated word) and loved Alexandria more than Rome. He held triumphs there and Octavius Caesar found a will which he said was Antony's and which directed that Antony be buried in Alexandria rather than in Rome. 
It was easy to make it appear that Antony planned to conquer the West and then not only set himself up as king in Rome but make Cleopatra queen. Accusations such as these, skillfully spread, and made plausible by Antony's own actions, utterly destroyed any credit Antony might have in the West. 


My lord, Mark Antony




And in upon Octavius Caesar, at this moment, comes Octavia, apparently on her errand of mediation. She says: 


My lord, Mark Antony,

Hearing that you prepared for war, acquainted

My grieved ear withal; whereon I begged

His pardon for return.





óAct III, scene vi, lines 57-60 


It would appear that Octavia, who left Mark Antony two scenes before, now arrives in Rome. All the events that took place over three years-the defeat and death of Sextus Pompeius, the demotion of Lepidus, the campaigns of Mark Antony in Parthia and Armenia (to which Octavius makes reference in passing)-are all hastened over in the one intervening scene.
This serves a purpose. In many places in the play, Mark Antony is whitewashed to make him a more sympathetic hero. Here he is made to seem worse than he is so that the love story with Cleopatra can be made more dramatic. 
In actual fact, he returned to Cleopatra only after three years, when his marriage to Octavia proved to be politically worthless-or worse. Here in the play, it appears that even while Octavia is on her way to intercede for Antony with her brother, the faithless Antony deserts her. 
Octavius asks her where Antony is and when she innocently says that he is in Athens, her brother says: 


No, my most wronged sister,

Cleopatra Hath nodded him to her.





óAct III, scene vi, lines 65-66 


Cleopatra's power over Antony thus seems enormous. The truth of Antony's return would have considerably diminished the glamour of the love affair. 


The kings o'th'earth Ö




Indeed, Octavius goes on to say, Antony is preparing for war: 


He hath given his empire

Up to a whore, who now are levying

The kings o'th'earth for war.

He hath assembled Bocchus, the King of Libya;

Archelaus, Of Cappadocia;

Philadelphos, King Of Paphlagonia;

the Thracian king, Adallas;

King Mauchas of Arabia;

King of Pont; Herod of Jewry;

Mithridates, King Of Comagene;

Polemon and Amyntas,

The kings of Mede and Lycaonia;

With a more larger list of scepters





óAct III, scene vi, lines 66-76 


This list of kings sounds impressive; the sonorous syllables roll off the tongue. They are at best, however, a set of puppet kinglets, with very little power except for what prestige their names can lend Antony. Cappadocia, Paphlagonia, Pont (Pontus), Comagene, and Lycaonia are all regions in Asia Minor. Herod and Mauchas represent small kingdoms in southern Syria, and so on. Indeed, one of the kings listed, Bocchus of Libya, actually fought on Octavius Caesar's side.
Nevertheless, this sort of thing was undoubtedly used by Octavius to rouse the Roman populace with the fear that Antony was turning the whole mysterious East loose upon them. 


Ö denounced against usÖ




Between this scene and the next, further crucial events take place. 
Toward the end of 32 b.c. Octavius finally had the situation exactly where he wanted it. The Senate and the people had grown so exasperated that the former declared war against Cleopatra and the latter supported it avidly. 
This was utterly clever. The war was not against Mark Antony, who could be pictured as a Roman general deceived and besotted by a wicked foreign queen; it was against the wicked foreign queen herself. It was not a civil war; it was a patriotic war against the dangerous kingdom of Egypt. (The fact that Egypt was helpless and harmless and that Cleopatra, minus Mark Antony, had no military power at all, could be ignored. The public knew nothing of that.) 
Naturally, Mark Antony had to fight. But he had to fight now against Rome and on the side of the foreigner. Desperately he shifted his armies to Greece and prepared to invade Italy. 
Cleopatra, in a decision as foolish as that of Octavius Caesar had been wise, decided to accompany Antony, and together they are now at Actium, a promontory in northwestern Greece. 
The next scene, then, opens in Actium, where Cleopatra is raging against Enobarbus, who objects to her presence there. She points out that the war, after all, was declared against her: 


Is't not denounced against us? Why should not we

Be there in person?





óAct III, scene vii, lines 5-6 


But Cleopatra was unintentionally fighting on Octavius Caesar's side in this respect. As a foreign queen, she was no more popular with Antony's soldiers than with the enemy. 


And take in Toryne




Indeed, it is the spirit of Antony's forces that is their weakest point, and Octavius Caesar knows it. Anti-Cleopatra propaganda reaches them and the desertions are numerous. The men won't fight for an Egyptian against Rome. Antony's movements are slowed and made uncertain by the increasingly doubtful loyalty of his men. 
Octavius Caesar's general, Agrippa, moves quickly, however. Where it had been Antony's hope to invade Italy, it was Agrippa instead who swept across from that peninsula and landed in Greece. Antony comes in with his general, Canidius, brooding about it: 


Is it not strange, Canidius,

That from Tarentum and Brundusium

He could so quickly cut the Ionian sea

And take in Toryne?





óAct III, scene vii, lines 20-23 


Tarentum and Brundusium are ports in the "heel" of Italy. The Ionian Sea is the stretch of water between southern Italy and western Greece. Toryne is a small harbor in northwestern Greece, thirty-five miles up the coast from Actium. 


Ö not well manned




Octavius Caesar's rapid movement (or, rather, Agrippa's, in his name) has cut Antony's line of communication and put him in the peril of running short of supplies. It is to Antony's interest to force a land battle; he has eighty thousand troops to Octavius Caesar's seventy thousand and it is Antony who is the better tactician on land. 
On the other hand, it is to Octavius Caesar's best interests to fight a sea battle. He has only four hundred ships to Antony's five hundred, but he still would have the advantage there. Enobarbus points this out to Antony, saying: 


Your ships are not well manned;

Your mariners are muleters, reapers,

people Ingrossed by swift impress. In Caesar's fleet

Are those that often have 'gainst Pompey fought;

Their ships are yare, yours, heavyÖ





óAct III, scene vii, lines 34-38 


The growing desertions from Antony's standards have left his ships shorthanded, and their crews have had to be fleshed out by the drafting of non-sailors from the surrounding population. And, of course, though you can force a man onto a ship, you cannot force him to be a sailor. 
The logical course of action would have been to retreat inland and force Octavius to follow and then fight a land battle. Even an ordinary soldier begs him to take that strategy, saying: 


O noble Emperor, do not fight by sea,

Trust not to rotten planks.





óAct III, scene vii, lines 61-62 


It is Cleopatra, though, who holds out strongly for a sea engagement. We can speculate why. The hardships of an army march might have excluded her and sent her back to Alexandria. A sea victory, on the other hand, would include the Egyptian fleet and entitle her to a share in the glory and the profits. She points out: 


I have sixty sails, Caesar none better.





óAct III, scene vii, line 49 


And Antony rejects the advice of his seasoned warriors, decides on the sea battle Cleopatra wants, and loses his last chance. 


With all their sixtyÖ




There follows the sea battle, the Battle of Actium, on September 2, 31 b.c. It is one of the crucial clashes of history. 
The battle is, of course, not shown onstage, but Enobarbus supplies the vision of its crucial moment. In agony, he turns away from the sight: 


Naught, naught, all naught! I can behold no longer.

Th 'Antoniad, the Egyptian admiral,

With all their sixty, flyÖ





óAct III, scene x, lines 1-3 


When the battle began, Octavius' ships could at first make little impression on Antony's large vessels, and the battle seemed to be a useless one between maneuverability and power. Finally, though, Agrippa's superior seamanship maneuvered Antony's fleet into stretching its line, and Agrippa's ships began to dart through the openings that resulted, making straight for Cleopatra's fleet of sixty that lay in reserve. 
At this point, Cleopatra ordered her flagship, the Antoniad (named in honor of Antony, of course), to turn and carry her to safety. The remainder of her fleet went with her. 
The easy interpretation is that it was simply cowardice. Or perhaps the cowardice wasn't that simple; she felt the battle was lost and that retreat was necessary. She had to preserve herself from capture (with reason - for with her a captive the war would be lost), and also the treasure chest, which was aboard the ship. 


The noble ruin of her magic Ö




Scarus, another officer, enters in wild passion, for even worse has developed. He tells Enobarbus that, once Cleopatra sailed away: 


The noble ruin of her magic, Antony,

Claps on his sea wing, and (like a doting mallard)

Leaving the fight in height, flies after her.





óAct III, scene x, lines 18-20 


This is the point at which the world is lost and Antony is forever disgraced. There might be reasons for Cleopatra running away; the only reason for Antony is an impulse of love. This impulse might be understandable, even admirable, to romantics, and surely there is nothing so worth a sigh as to witness some great game tossed away for love. 
Yet we must admit that however admirable it may be to ruin oneself for love, however noble to go down to personal death for love, it is not noble to cast away the lives and fortunes of thousands of others for love. 
Antony abandoned a fleet that was fighting bravely on his behalf, and in the confusion and disheartenment that followed his flight, many men died who might have lived had he remained. What's more, he abandoned thousands of officers and men on the nearby mainland, who had been prepared to die for him, leaving them only the alternative of useless resistance or ignoble surrender. 
We may understand Antony, but we cannot excuse him. 


He at Philippi...




Antony well understood his own disgrace. After Actium, he played awhile with the idea (according to Plutarch) of retiring from the world in an agony of misanthropy and self-pity-like Timon of Athens. (It may have been the reading of this passage, indeed, that inspired Shakespeare to try his hand, rather unsuccessfully, at Timon of Athens immediately after he had finished Antony and Cleopatra.) 
Antony cannot bring himself to be a Timon, however, and he must crawl back to the only place that will now receive him-Alexandria. Only Egypt is now his who once ruled half the world, and it will remain his only until Octavius Caesar comes to get him. 
Antony broods madly on this same Octavius:


He at Philippi kept

His sword e'en like a dancer, while I struck

The lean and wrinkled Cassius; and 'twas

I That the mad Brutus ended. ..





óAct III, scene xi, lines 35-38 


It is true. The Battle of Philippi was all Antony and Octavius' portion of the army was defeated. For that matter, Octavius' portion of the fleet was defeated by Sextus, and Octavius was sick during the Battle of Actium, so that the last two victories were all Agrippa. 
Yet Octavius, always beaten, was somehow the winner because what he had he kept and what he lost one way he won another. He could use other men well and he had brains and a cool judgment, and that stands head and shoulders over mere "style." 


Fall not a tearÖ




There is no more room for glory in Antony. Shakespeare, for what is left of the play, intends only to recoup for Antony all the sympathy he has lost by his folly in another way; he will win it all back and more by showing Antony the lover. 
With all he has lost, Antony can only reproach Cleopatra sorrowfully. When she says that she did not realize he would follow her, he replies: 


Egypt, thou knew'st too well

My heart was to thy rudder tied by th'strings,

And thou shouldst tow me after.





óAct III, scene xi, lines 56-58 


And when she weeps and begs for pardon he says: 


Fall not a tear, I say; one of them rates

All that is won and lost. Give me a kiss;

Even this repays me.





óAct III, scene xi, lines 69-71 


What an incredible fool! What an exasperating idiot! But then why do the tears come? And they will continue. Those who can sit through the rest of the play dry-eyed are either seeing an incredibly poor performance or are afflicted with an incredibly impoverished heart.


Ö her all-disgraced friend




Antony has no choice now but to sue for peace and get what terms he can. He has no kings to send now; they have all deserted him in the aftermath of Actium. He sends his children's tutor to approach Octavius Caesar. 
For Cleopatra, he asks that she remain Queen of Egypt only, giving up all the additions Antony has given her. For himself he asks that he remain in Egypt with her or, still less, that he be allowed to remain in Athens as a private citizen. Octavius replies to the Ambassador: 


For Antony

I have no ears to his request. The Queen

Of audience nor desire shall fail, so she

From Egypt drive her all-disgraced friend

Or take his life there.





óAct III, scene xii, lines 19-23 


Octavius knows his own military deficiencies as well as Antony does. He knows that all his victories are the work of his allies and subordinates and that he himself has contributed nothing in the field. What he desires more than anything else, then, is a glorious triumph in Rome, such as his famous great-uncle had received. It is very likely that for himself he required no such trumperies, but he must surely have realized that his hold on the Roman people would not be complete without some public celebration of victories associated (however unfairly) with his name. 
For the purpose of a triumph, Antony is useless. He is a Roman and could not be dragged at the chariot wheels, and even if he were, that would arouse dangerous sympathies. Nor could he be left alive, even as a private citizen in Athens. How long would he remain a private citizen? How soon would he begin to intrigue to regain what he had lost? For Antony, it had to be death. 
Cleopatra, however, must live. She was a foreigner. She was feared to an unimaginable (and undeserved) extent. Her reputation as a charmer and as an insidious schemer against Rome was so impossibly high that the sight of her in chains walking behind Octavius Caesar's triumphant chariot would drive Rome wild with exultation and turn Octavius, truly, into another Julius. Octavius Caesar might have a triumph without Cleopatra; but without her it would be a poor thing and leave his life in that one respect forever incomplete. 
Octavius was therefore ready to offer Cleopatra anything, make her any promise, in order to keep her alive.


Ö the boy CaesarÖ




The news of Octavius Caesar's terms is brought to Antony and he says to Cleopatra bitterly: 


To the boy Caesar send this grizzled head,

And he will fill thy wishes to the brim





óAct III, scene xiii, lines 17-18 


The play moves so quickly through space and time that there is no sensation, while watching it, of passing time. Eleven years have passed since the opening scene of the play, if we are thinking of real history. Antony is now about fifty-three years old and his head may well be grizzled. The "boy Caesar" is now thirty-three years old. He is not really venerable, but he is certainly a boy no longer. 


Ö the getting of a lawful race




Meanwhile, another ambassador, an officer named Thidias, approaches Cleopatra separately. Clearly, if she is to be induced to sacrifice Antony, it can be best done in Antony's absence. Cleopatra is eager to flatter Octavius into decent terms, both for herself and Antony, and it must be admitted that what historical evidence we have gives us no clear sign that she dreamed of deserting Antony at any time. 
However, even while she is fawning on Thidias and giving him her hand to kiss, Antony enters. In the midst of his disgrace and defeat, he finds it only too easy to believe he is being betrayed. He orders Thidias to be whipped and rages at Cleopatra for her immorality and for the other men in her life (surely this is something he knew all about to begin with). He cries out in self-pity: 


Have I my pillow left unpressed in Rome,

Forborne the getting of a lawful race,

And by a gem of women, to be abused

By one that looks on feeders?





óAct III, scene xiii, lines 106-9 


To those who know only as much of Antony and Cleopatra as they read in this play it would come as a surprise to know that Antony did indeed beget a lawful race (that is, legitimate children). He had two sons by Fulvia. 
The "gem of women" must be a reference to Octavia, but there, too, Shakespeare is bending history. In the play Antony's connection with Octavia seems fleeting, but in actual history, he spent a couple of years with her in Athens and their relationship was long enough and real enough to produce two daughters. 


Ö the hill of BasanÖ




Half mad with frustration, Antony taunts Cleopatra with her infidelities to him (in advance yet, for the examples he cites came about before they had met in Tarsus) until he makes himself a cuckold in his own eyes, crying out: 


O, that I were

Upon the hill of Basan to outroar

The horned herd!





óAct III, scene xiii, lines 126-28 


Basan is the biblical Bashan, an area of pasturage renowned for its fat cows and strong bulls. Thus, the psalmist describes his troubles metaphorically in this way: "Many bulls have compassed me: strong bulls of Bashan have beset me round" (Psalms 22:12). Since bulls are homed, the reference to cuckoldry is clear (see page I-84). 
But the reference is biblical. It is conceivable that a cultivated Roman of the times might have come across a Greek translation of the Hebrew Bible and have read it out of curiosity or interest-but to suppose that the non-intellectual Antony would do so is out of the question. 


Ö the old ruffianÖ




Cleopatra manages to calm down Antony at last and bring him to what senses remain in him. 
Octavius Caesar's army is now just outside Alexandria and Antony decides to meet him in one last land fight. In fact, he even-as a gesture-offers to meet Octavius in single combat. 
Octavius meets this challenge with characteristic contempt. He says to Maecenas: 


My messenger

He hath whipped with rods; dares me to personal combat.

Caesar to Antony: let the old ruffian know I have many

other ways to die; meantime Laugh at his challenge.





óAct IV, scene i, lines 2-6 


Actually, though one could not guess it from the play, eleven months have passed since the Battle of Actium. Octavius Caesar did not swoop down on Egypt at once. That could wait, for Antony and Cleopatra were helplessly penned up there. 
Octavius first founded the city of Nicopolis ("City of Victory") near the site of the battle. Then he had to spend time reorganizing the affairs of the Eastern provinces that had been Antony's domain and were now his. (Egypt, be it remembered, had never, till then, been a Roman province, but was in theory an independent kingdom.) 
Then he had to return to Rome to take care of pressing matters there. It was only in July 30 b.c. that he could sail his army to Egypt itself. By that tune Cleopatra was thirty-nine. 
Antony and Cleopatra had spent the eleven-month respite in luxury as though they knew their time was limited and were determined to make the most of what was left. But now Octavius Caesar had come and the time for the final battle was at hand. 


Ö the god HerculesÖ




The eve of the last battle is a strange one. The soldiers hear mysterious music in the air and underground, moving away into the distance. One soldier guesses at the meaning: 


'Tis the god Hercules, whom Antony loved,

Now leaves him.





óAct IV, scene iii, lines 15-16 


This eerie tale is told by Plutarch and is the kind of legend that arises after the fact. 
It is, of course, rather late in the day for Hercules to leave poor Antony. Hercules had clearly abandoned him on the eve of Actium. 


Ö send his treasure after.. .




Nor is it only Hercules that abandons Antony. The common soldier who had advised a land battle at Actium now meets Antony again. If that land battle had been fought, he says: 


The kings that have revolted, and the soldier

That has this morning left thee, would have still

Followed thy heels.





óAct IV, scene v, lines 4-6 


Thus it is that Antony discovers that the rough and faithful Enobarbus has at last deserted him and gone over to Octavius Caesar's camp. But Antony, in adversity, always rises to heights of strength and nobility he cannot possibly reach in prosperity. He realizes that not Enobarbus' wickedness but his own follies have driven the soldier away. He is thinking perhaps that after his own desertion at Actium, no soldier owes him loyalty, and he says: 


O, my fortunes have

Corrupted honest men!





óAct IV, scene v, lines 16-17 


And, having learned that Enobarbus has crept away so secretly as to have been unable to take with him his personal belongings and the money he has earned in the course of his labors, Antony says to his aide-de-camp: 


Go, Eros, send his treasure after; do it,

Detain no jot, I charge thee.





óAct IV, scene v, lines 12-13 


Ö alone the villainÖ




Shakespeare found the tale of this princely gesture in Plutarch and it is believable in Antony. He was lost, anyway, and it was the kind of quixotic gesture a man noble by fits would make. If it had been Octavius Caesar, we might suppose it to have been done out of a desire to punish the deserter, for punishment it most certainly turns out to be. 
Enobarbus is already suffering over his betrayal, and realizes that the tardy converts to Octavius Caesar's cause are not truly trusted and are certainly not honored, but live in a kind of contemptible twilight. In the midst of his misgivings, he hears his property has been sent after him. Stupefied, he bursts out in agony: 


/ am alone the villain of the earth,

And feel I am so most.





óAct IV, scene vi, lines 30-34 


They are beatenÖ




In the last battle, despite everything, the advantage falls to Antony once more. He and his soldiers fight like madmen and his officer, Eros, rushes in to say:


They are beaten, sir, and our advantage serves

For a fair victory.





óAct IV, scene vii, lines 11-12 


But, alas, this is one of Shakespeare's few inventions of the play. There was no victory at this point. There wasn't even a true battle. Antony's remnant of an army gave in almost at once and Antony was penned up in Alexandria. 
What Shakespeare wanted was one last unexpected uplift; one last illusion; one last hope of escape from the doom the lovers had madly woven about themselves; perhaps one sight of might-have-been for the land battle at Actium that had never come. 


O, Antony




The victory serves also to add the last unbearable pang to Enobarbus' agony. Had those faithful to Antony had the courage and will to fight and win while he himself had slunk away, a coward traitor? He staggers into the night, crying: 


O, Antony,

Nobler than my revolt is infamous,

Forgive me in thine own particular,

But let the world rank me in register

A master-leaver and a fugitive.

O, Antony! O, Antony!





óAct IV, scene ix, lines 18-23 


And so, asking forgiveness from Antony alone, and content to have all the world besides scorn him, he dies. Yet he does not have his wish, for with Shakespeare's deathless music pleading his case, who can scorn him? No one! 
Again, Shakespeare follows his sources in having Enobarbus die of heartbreak. From a historical standpoint, it is hard to believe in such a death, but here, as in so many cases, it is far better to romanticize with Shakespeare than be flat with history. 
There is a sequel to the story that Shakespeare doesn't hint at, but one that should be mentioned if only to soften a little our regret at Enobarbus' fate. 
Enobarbus had a son, Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus, who in later years served Octavius Caesar and who did well. This Lucius eventually married Antonia, who was Mark Antony's elder daughter by Octavia. They had a son, Gnaeus Domitius Ahenobarbus (Enobarbus' grandson and namesake), who thus had both Enobarbus and Antony for grandfathers.
The younger Ahenobarbus married Agrippina, a great-granddaughter of Octavius Caesar and a great-granddaughter of Livia, the wife of Octavius Caesar, by her earlier marriage. Their son, the great-grandson of Antony and the great-grandson of Enobarbus, as well as the great-great-grandson of both Livia and Octavius Caesar himself, became the fifth Roman emperor in a.d. 54, eighty-four years after Enobarbus' death. 
Could Enobarbus have suspected in his wildest dreams that a descendant of his would one day rule all Rome? 
It is rather a shame to spoil the story by identifying this fifth emperor, the last of the house which Julius Caesar first brought to mastery in Rome, and who combined in himself the heritage of Octavius Caesar, his wife Livia, his sister Octavia, his enemy Antony, and his defected enemy, Enobarbus, but I must. The emperor was the infamous Nero, whose real name was Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus. 


All is lost




And now Shakespeare returns to history and lets Antony's forces betray him. Antony enters, shouting: 


All is lost!

This foul Egyptian hath betrayed me:

My fleet hath yielded to the foe, and yonder

They cast their caps up and carouse together

Like friends long lost. Triple-turned whore!

'Tis thou Hast sold me to this novice.. .





óAct IV, scene xii, lines 9-14 


Antony is almost mad in his frustration, and when Cleopatra enters, he yells at her those words most designed to hurt her, exulting in the possibility that she may be taken by Octavius Caesar to grace his triumph. 


The shirt of Nessus Ö




Cleopatra rushes off, appalled by Antony's fury, and in deadly fear that he may even forestall Octavius Caesar's victory and kill her with his own hands. This possibility is made clear to the audience by Antony's rage-filled mythological allusion, when he cries: 


The shirt of Nessus is upon me; teach me,

Alcides, thou mine ancestor, thy rage.

Let me lodge Lichas on the horns o'th'moon.





óAct IV, scene xii, lines 43-45 


Alcides is, of course, Hercules (see page I-70). Hercules was the personification of blind strength, and since such strength can often be misapplied, several tales were told of what Hercules did in his mad rages. In one of these madnesses, he killed six of his own children and it was in penance for this that he was condemned to perform his twelve labors. Such madness Antony feels to be coming over himself. 
The specific reference is to an event late in Hercules' life, when he took his last wife, Deianeira. At one time the two were crossing a river in flood. Nessus, a centaur (half man, half horse), offered to carry Deianeira across while Hercules swam. The arrangement was accepted, but, coming to the other side, the centaur galloped off with Deianeira and tried to rape her. The angry Hercules shot down the centaur with one of those arrows which had been dipped in the deadly poison of the Hydra's (see page I-237) blood. 
As Nessus lay dying, he told Deianeira that if she saved some of his blood and placed it on Hercules' shirt, it would be an infallible way of assuring his fidelity. While he wore the shirt, he would love only her. Deianeira believed him. 
Eventually, when Hercules began to wander, Deianeira remembered Nessus' advice and sent him a bloodstained shirt by Lichas, one of his attendants. 
Hercules put it on (not noticing the blood, apparently) and at once the poison it carried from his own arrow began to burn into him with agonizing pain. He writhed in anguish, but the shirt had grown to his body and could not be removed. He seized Lichas as madness came over him, throwing him high into the air with all the might of his superhuman muscles. Lichas fell into the sea and was changed into a rock, while Hercules himself died in torture. Deianeira, at hearing the news, killed herself. 
It was this "shirt of Nessus" that Antony felt himself to be wearing, and a like agony that he felt within himself. In his grief and rage he is ready to kill Cleopatra: 


The witch shall die:

To the young Roman boy she hath sold me Ö





óAct IV, scene xii, lines 47-48 


The "young Roman boy" is now thirty-three, remember. 


Ö the boar of Thessaly




Cleopatra is in the last extreme of panic. She knows that it is because of her that Antony has frittered away everything, and there is no doubt in her mind that he intends to kill her. She cries out to her ladies:


O, he's more mad

Than Telamon for his shield; the boar

of Thessaly Was never so embossed.





óAct IV, scene xiii, lines 1-3 


Cleopatra matches Antony's example of mythological rage and madness (Hercules) with two examples of her own; making, as it happens, a mistake in each case. 
It was not Telamon, but Telamon's son, Ajax (see page I-110), that went mad. After the death of Achilles under the walls of Troy, the question arose as to who was to inherit his divinely wrought armor, and the choice narrowed to the mighty-thewed Ajax and the shrewd and cunning Ulysses (see page I-92). We might suppose the Greeks reasoned that Ajax's muscles could kill only one Trojan at a time but that Ulysses' shrewd policy might yet win the war altogether. (And it did, for it was Ulysses who finally conceived the stratagem of the wooden horse-see page I-188.) So the armor went to Ulysses. 
Now, finally, Ajax's long-suffering and unsubtle heart broke and he went mad. He planned to revenge himself on the leaders of the Greek army, and mistaking a herd of sheep for men, he lunged among them with his sword, screaming imprecations. When he recovered from his rage and found himself surrounded by slaughtered beasts, he realized that he had but made himself ridiculous-so he killed himself. 
As for the boar of Thessaly who was so embossed (that is, foaming at the mouth with fury), he was a huge mad creature sent to Calydon to ravage the countryside because the Calydonians had neglected to make proper sacrifices to Diana (Artemis). But Calydon was in Aetolia, not Thessaly. 


The sevenfold shield.. .




Cleopatra feels that the only way of saving her life (and this is straight from Plutarch and is not Shakespeare's dramatic invention) is to send news to Antony that she has died with his name upon her lips. Her feeling is that he would then realize she had not betrayed him and she could safely come back to life so that together they might plan their next move. 
But she miscalculated the effect of the news on Antony. In the midst of his raving for her death, the news is brought to him that she is already dead, and instantly his rage vanishes. 
The full swell of the orchestra ceases sharply and leaves behind the soft wail of one lonely flute, as Mark Antony turns to his aide and says: 


Unarm, Eros. The long days task is done,

And we must sleep.





óAct IV, scene xiv, lines 35-36 


He scorns the armor he is removing, for it cannot protect him from this new blow. He says: 


The sevenfold shield of Ajax cannot keep

The battery from my heart.





óAct IV, scene xiv, lines 38-39 


Again a reference to Ajax; this time to his famous shield, which Homer describes in connection with the duel of that hero with Hector. It was a huge shield, covering Ajax from neck to ankles, made of seven separate layers of tough oxhide and covered with bronze. It was so heavy that none but Ajax (or Achilles) could wield it, and so strong that a spear driven by the full fury of Hector's arm could penetrate but six of the layers. 


Ö souls do couch on flowersÖ




Antony plans suicide and dreams that in death he and Cleopatra will be reunited. He imagines them in Elysium (see page I-13) and says: 


Ö stay for me.

Where souls do couch on flowers, we'll hand in hand,

And with our sprightly port make the ghosts gaze:

Dido and her Aeneas shall want troops,

And all the haunt be ours.





óAct IV, scene xiv, lines 50-54 


I am dying, EgyptÖ




But even Antony's last act betrays him. He cannot have himself killed by his men. Eros kills himself rather than Antony. (That is in Plutarch and Shakespeare is not forced to make it up.) In desperation, Antony falls on his own sword, but does not aim correctly. He is badly wounded and dying, but still alive. 
Now comes a messenger from Cleopatra, who, too late, fears the effect of the news of her death. She has locked herself, for safety, in her own tomb. (It was the custom of Egyptian monarchs to build, while alive, their own resting places after death-the pyramids having represented that custom at its most incredibly extreme. Shakespeare refers to Cleopatra's tomb as the "monument," and, of course, it served that purpose too.) 
The dying Antony is brought to the tomb, carried on the shoulders of his guard. Cleopatra watches from a high window. She dares not open the doors to the tomb, for once Antony is dead, it seems entirely reasonable that his soldiers will kill her. From the courtyard, Antony, never more in love, calls out: 


I am dying, Egypt, dying; only

I here importune death awhile, until

Of many thousand kisses the poor last

I lay upon thy lips.





óAct IV, scene xv, lines 18-21 


Cleopatra and her women draw Antony up to the window on a stretcher. (Plutarch describes the effort it took to do so and how Cleopatra, with the strength of despair, managed.) The lovers are together one last moment and the kiss that Antony asked for is given. 
And then he dies, fourteen years after the death of Julius Caesar had embarked him on that wild course during which he had held the world in his hands, and had thrown it away. 


Ö eternal in our triumph




The news of Antony's death reaches Octavius Caesar, who bursts into tears. 
Could Octavius, that cold politician, that efficient machine who never made a serious mistake, be so soft at the death of the man he had been fully determined to execute? Or was his sorrow a calculated device to blunt the sympathy of men for Antony? 
It is clearly Shakespeare's intent to argue the latter, for as Octavius Caesar's speech grows more and more emotional and eloquent, an Egyptian arrives with a message from Cleopatra and Octavius turns off the flow at once and is all business, saying: 


But I will tell you at some meeter season.

The business of this man looks out of him;

We'll hear him what he says.





óAct V, scene i, lines 48-51 


Octavius Caesar learns that Cleopatra is still locked in her tomb and is sending to him to find out his terms. He is all sharpness now. His victory has been partially blunted by Antony's suicide, for in Roman terms a suicide under such conditions is a noble action and gains the dead man sympathy (which Octavius had to neutralize as far as possible by ostentatious tears and praise-as Antony had done over the corpse of Brutus, see page 1-315).
But there still remains Cleopatra. It is now in the highest degree necessary to keep her from killing herself. He sends her comforting words by her messenger and then sends Proculeius, one of his own men, to her, telling him: 


Ö give her what comforts

The quality of her passion shall require,

Lest, in her greatness, by some mortal stroke

She do defeat us. For her life in Rome

Would be eternal in our triumph.





óAct V, scene i, lines 62-66 


Ö conquered EgyptÖ




Proculeius reaches Cleopatra and asks her terms for surrender. She states them, saying: 


.. .if he [Octavius] please

To give me conquered Egypt for my son,

He gives me so much of mine own asI

Will kneel to him with thanks.




 -Act V, scene ii, lines 18-21


She is offering to abdicate and asking that her son be recognized as King of Egypt so that the land will remain independent to some extent. She doesn't say which son, but presumably she means Caesarion, who is now seventeen years old and who is coruler with her as Ptolemy XIV. 
Naturally, this is an entirely unacceptable request from Octavius Caesar's standpoint. With the son of Cleopatra on the throne, or even alive as a private citizen, he would always be the focus for revolts. What Octavius Caesar intended, and what he did, was to annex Egypt, not only as a Roman province, but as a personal possession with he himself getting all the revenues, as though he were a king of Egypt. 
This meant potential rivals would have to be put out of the way. Caesar-ion was too dangerous to be left alive, and in the aftermath of Octavius Caesar's victory, he was executed. The same fate was waiting for Antony's older son by Fulvia. Two of the children of Antony and Cleopatra were allowed to live and were brought up by none other than Octavia, who, in this, showed herself nobly forgiving. (It is also possible that Octavia had loved Antony and had felt a certain guilt in having been used by her brother as one more weapon with which to defeat him.) 
The daughter of Mark Antony and Cleopatra, Cleopatra Selene, was eventually married to Juba of Numidia, the son of a king (also named Juba) who had died at the Battle of Thapsus (see page I-281) fighting against Julius Caesar. The younger Juba had been given a complete Roman education and in 25 b.c. was made King of Mauretania, located where the present-day Morocco is to be found. Thus a younger Cleopatra became an African queen. 
The two had a son-the grandson of Antony and Cleopatra-who was called Ptolemy of Mauretania. He was the very last of the Ptolemies. He reigned quietly till a.d. 40, when he was called to Rome and there, seventy years after the suicide of Mark Antony, was put to death by the mad emperor Caligula, for no better reason than that he had accumulated wealth which the Emperor felt he would like to confiscate for his own use. 
But all that lay in the future. At the moment, Cleopatra is asking that Egypt be left to be ruled by her son, and Proculeius answers in soft words, for he knows that Roman soldiers are quietly surrounding the tomb and forcing the doors. 
Suddenly Cleopatra is seized from behind and the dagger she attempts to draw is wrested from her. It is clear that she will not be allowed to commit suicide. All means for doing so will be taken from her and she will be watched. All she has left, it seems, are her memories: 


I dreamt there was an Emperor Antony.

O, such another sleep, that I might see

But such another man.





óAct V, scene ii, lines 76-78 


He words meÖ




Octavius himself arrives; smooth, gentle, and gracious. In Plutarch, Cleopatra is described as being far from herself; her hair torn, her face scratched and puffy. Still, she is Cleopatra; pushing forty perhaps, but the creature of charm who could have her will of the greatest of Romans. Why not Octavius Caesar as well? 
But Octavius is immune. He is cold and unimpassioned. He pushes aside the list of possessions she hands him and is ummoved when Cleopatra's secretary, currying the favor of the victor, reveals that Cleopatra, even at this great crisis, has thoughtfully listed less than half her assets. (After all, why should this disturb Octavius? He plans to take all Egypt.) 
His last words to her are: 


Feed and sleep:

Our care and pity is so much upon you

That we remain your friend; and so adieu.





óAct V, scene ii, lines 187-89 


When she tries to prostrate herself before him, he will not allow it. But as soon as he leaves, Cleopatra looks after him bitterly and says: 


He words me, girls, he words me, that I should not

Be noble to myself!





óAct V, scene ii, lines 191-92 


She knows certainly that what Octavius has in mind for her is his own triumph. If she had any doubts in the matter, one of Octavius' officers, Cornelius Dolabella (according to Plutarch, and followed in this by Shakespeare), sends her secret information to this effect. 
Sadly, Cleopatra pictures to her ladies the triumph in such a way as to make it plain to the audience (not Roman, and therefore not necessarily understanding the virtues of suicide) that death is preferable. As a climax she describes the comic plays that will be written about them: 


Antony

Shall be brought drunken forth, and 1 shall see

Some squeaking Cleopatra boy my greatness

I'th'posture of a whore.





óAct V, scene ii, lines 218-21 


It is almost as though Shakespeare is preening himself here. After all, he has written the play and in it, Antony is far more than a mere drunkard and Cleopatra far more than a mere whore. The magic of Shakespeare converts them at last to ideal lovers and it is as such, thanks to him, that they will live forever. 


Ö the pretty worm of Nilus.. .




Now must come the suicide. 
Actually, the method used is a mystery. The Roman guards left behind by Octavius Caesar were surely impressed with the fact that Cleopatra must be kept alive. Cleopatra must therefore have succeeded in hiding something small and unnoticeable, prepared for such a contingency. 
Her body was found virtually unmarked except for what seemed to be a puncture or two on her arm. It had to be poison then, but administered how? Was it the puncture of a poisoned needle which she had kept hidden in her hair? Or was it a poison snake? 
The poison snake is much more unlikely and is, indeed, rather implausible, but it is exceedingly dramatic and, whether true or not, is accepted by all who have ever heard of Cleopatra. If they have heard only one thing of her, it is her method of suicide by snake.
She prepares for that suicide as though she were meeting her lover once again, and indeed, she expects to, in Elysium. She demands that she be dressed in her most splendid gowns as on that occasion when she met Antony for the first time: 


Show me, my women, like a queen: go fetch

My best attires. I am again for Cydnus,

To meet Mark Antony.





óAct V, scene ii, lines 227-29 


A peasant is brought in now with the gift of a basket of figs for her. It is this, partly, which makes the tale of the poison snake implausible. Would anyone have been allowed in to see her under the circumstances? Would he have failed to undergo a search if he were passed through? Is it conceivable that the basket of figs would have been unexamined? 
Yet that is the tale that Plutarch reports as one possibility. He also talks of poisoned needles and poisoned razors. 
Cleopatra asks the peasant: 


Hast thou the pretty worm of Nilus there,

That kills and pains not?





óAct V, scene ii, lines 243-44 


He does! The "pretty worm" is the asp, or Egyptian cobra, whose venom works quickly and painlessly. What's more, the creature was worshiped, as so many dangerous animals were in Egypt, and the coiled head of the cobra was worn on the headdress of the Pharaohs. A death by cobra bite was a royal death; it was rather like being bitten by a god. 
Cleopatra is now ready. She says to her ladies in waiting: 


Give me my robe, put on my crown, I have

Immortal longings in me. Now no more

The juice of Egypt's grape shall moist this lip.

Yare, yare, good Iras; quick: methinks I hear

Antony call: I see him rouse himself

To praise my noble act. I hear him mock

The luck of Caesar, which the gods give men

To excuse their after wrath. Husband, I come:





óAct V, scene ii, lines 280-87 


And yet not all is pure love of Antony. There is some relish in feeling that she is depriving Octavius of his final victory. For as the asp is biting her, she says to it:


O couldst thou speak,

That I might hear thee call great Caesar ass

Unpolicied!





óAct V, scene ii, lines 306-8 


It is well doneÖ




Cleopatra dies. Her lady in waiting Iras is already dead of heartbreak, and Charmian (whom early in the play the soothsayer had predicted would outlive her mistress) is applying the asp to her own arm. In come the Roman soldiers, but too late. 
Gaping at the dead Cleopatra, they get the significance of it at once. One of the soldiers cries: 


Ö All's not well: Caesar's beguiled.





óAct V, scene ii, line 323 


Then, when the same soldier angrily asks Charmian whether this sort of thing was well done, she answers proudly, just before dying: 


It is well done, and fitting for a princess

Descended of so many royal kings.





óAct V, scene ii, lines 326-27 


Ö an aspic's trailÖ




Octavius arrives to witness the defeat of what he planned as his crowning victory. They puzzle out the manner of her suicide. There is a swelling and a spot of blood on Cleopatra's breast and the soldier who had questioned Charmian now says: 


This is an aspic's trail; and these fig leaves

Have slime upon themÖ





óAct V, scene ii, lines 350-51 


It is an old superstition that snakes are slimy. They are not. Some snake-like sea creatures are slimy-lampreys, eels, salamanders. Snakes, however, are perfectly dry to the touch.


Ö another Antony




It falls to the cold Octavius to give Cleopatra her final epitaph. Even he is moved as he gazes at her dead body as she lies there-Cleopatra still. He says: 


Ö she looks like sleep,

As she would catch another

Antony In her strong toil of grace.





óAct V, scene ii, lines 345-47 


Nor is he vindictive. He says: 


Take up her bed,

And bear her women from the monument.

She shall be buried by her Antony.





óAct V, scene ii, lines 355-57 


Ö then to Rome




And now the world calls the one survivor and victor of all the turbulent events of the play. He says: 


Our army shall

In solemn show attend this funeral,

And then to Rome.




óAct V, scene ii, lines 362-64 


The civil wars that have lasted fifty years are over. The next year, 29 b.c., Octavius Caesar ordered the closing of the temple of Janus, indicating that Rome was at peace, the first time that had happened in over two hundred years. Then, in 27 b.c., he accepted the title of Augustus, by which he is best known to history. 
From 27 b.c. Augustus reigned for forty-one years, establishing a new kind of government, the Roman Empire, and serving as its first and by all odds the greatest of its emperors. So firm was the government he established and so honored was it in the memory of man that though the last Roman Emperor in Italy abdicated in a.d 476, another ruler calling himself Roman Emperor continued to reign in Constantinople. The Constantinopolitan line, which used the title of Roman Emperor to the end, endured till 1453, and even after it was gone there was still a Roman Emperor in Vienna-a line that continued till 1806. 
And even after that was gone there were emperors. In the German language, these were called Kaisers and in the Slavic languages tsars- both distortions of Caesar, the family name of Julius and Octavius. The last Russian tsar resigned his throne in 1917, the last German Kaiser in 1918, the last Bulgarian tsar in 1946. 
It is interesting that 1946 is exactly two thousand years after 44 b.c., the year in which Julius Caesar was assassinated. For that length of time not one year passed in which somewhere in the world there wasn't someone calling himself by a form of "Caesar" as title (as all the Roman emperors did). 








13. The Tragedy of Titus Andronicus


Of the four plays and one narrative history which are set in Rome, Titus Andronicus is the only one that does not deal with accepted Roman history or legend. It is utter fiction. Not one character in it, not one event, is to be found in history. 
What's more, Titus Andronicus is the bloodiest and most gruesome of Shakespeare's plays, and the one in which the horror seems present entirely for the sake of horror. 
Indeed, Titus Andronicus is so unpleasant a play that most critics would be delighted to be able to believe it was not written by Shakespeare. They cannot do so, however. There are contemporary references to Titus Andronicus as a Shakespearean tragedy, which also place the time of its writing at about 1593. It is an early play but by no means the earliest, and Shakespeare could surely have done better than Titus Andronicus by this time. 
Apparently, what Shakespeare was doing was experimenting with Sene-can tragedy (see page I-270). These blood-and-thunder plays written about horrible crimes and horrible revenges were immensely popular in Elizabethan tunes. Thomas Kyd, for instance, had written such a drama, The Spanish Tragedy, shortly before Shakespeare had begun his dramatic career, and had scored an immense success. 
Shakespeare had no objection to success and was perfectly willing to adjust himself to popular taste. In Titus Andronicus he therefore gave full vent to blood, cruelty, disaster, and revenge. Indeed, he went so far that one can almost wonder if he weren't deliberately pushing matters to the limit in order to express his disgust of the whole genre. 


Ö the imperial diadem of Rome




The play opens in Rome, with the Romans in the process of selecting a new Emperor. 
The two candidates for the throne are the two sons of the old Emperor; Saturninus, the older, and Bassianus, the younger. Both are clamoring for acceptance by the people. Saturninus stresses the fact that he is the elder: 


/ am his first-born son that was the last

That ware the imperial diadem of Rome;

Then let my father's honors live in me.





óAct I, scene i, lines 5-7 


The younger son, with a lesser claim, is forced to be more emotional. He begins: 


// ever Bassianus, Caesar's son,

Were gracious in the eyes of royal Rome,





óAct I, scene i, lines 10-11 


Who the Emperor was who was "the last that ware the imperial diadem of Rome" is never stated. 
To be sure, Bassianus calls himself "Caesar's son," but this is not a reference to Julius Caesar (see page I-253) or Octavius Caesar (see page I-292). All Roman emperors were called "Caesar," for that was one of the royal titles (see page I-390). 
In fact, the identity of the just-dead Roman Emperor couldn't possibly be determined, for the entire play is a weird amalgamation of different periods of Roman history. There is a panoply of senators, tribunes, and common Romans on stage, as though it were of the stern period of the Roman Republic, as in Coriolanus. On the other hand, we have emperors, of a later period, and barbarian invaders of a still later period. 
The names of the sons have some points of interest. The only important Saturninus in real Roman history was a radical politician who was killed about 100 b.c. in the years when the Roman Republic began the public disorders that were eventually to kill it. As for Bassianus, the name of the younger son, that is to be found among the names of three of the emperors of the dynasty of Septimius Severus, who ruled in the early third century. 
The elder son of Septimius Severus was Bassianus. He succeeded on his father's death in 211. Bassianus did not rule under that name but was universally called "Caracalla," a nickname derived from the long cloak (caracalla) he habitually wore. 
Bassianus had a younger brother, Geta, who was supposed to have inherited the emperorship along with him. The two brothers were deadly enemies, however, and by 212 Bassianus had killed Geta under particularly cruel circumstances. 
Thus, the competition between Saturninus and Bassianus in the play seems to reflect, faintly, the competition between Bassianus and Geta in history. 
In one respect, in fact, the time of Caracalla might be thought to be the latest period in which the play could be set, for it treats of a thoroughly pagan Rome. There is no sign of Christianity in the play, yet after Cara-calla's time, the growth of Christianity would have made the new religion impossible to ignore. 
There are, however, other aspects of the play that make the time of Caracalla far too early. 
As it happens, there is in existence a tale called The Tragical History of Titus Andronicus, of which the only known copy was published about a century and a half after Shakespeare's play was written. That copy may, however, be a reprint and the original may have appeared early enough to serve as Shakespeare's source. 
In the booklet the time is set in the reign of Theodosius, by whom is probably meant the most famous Emperor of that name, Theodosius I. He ruled from 379 to 395, nearly two centuries after Caracalla. 
When Theodosius died, he left behind two sons, but these, unlike the sons of Septimius Severus (or those in the play), did not compete for the throne. They inherited the co-emperorship in peace, with the elder, Arcadius, ruling the Eastern half from Constantinople, and the younger, Honorius, ruling the Western half from Rome. 
To be sure, by the time Theodosius was Emperor, Rome was thoroughly Christian and Theodosius himself was particularly pious in this respect, so that the paganism of the play would then become an anachronism. (On the other hand, considering the horrible events that take place in it, the existence of Christianity would be embarrassing.) 


Ö surnamed Pius




It turns out that there are factions in Rome who want neither son of the old Emperor, but who turn instead to a valiant general. The announcement is made by Marcus Andronicus the tribune, who happens to be a brother of that general. He says: 


Know that the people of Rome, for whom we stand

A special party, have by common voice,

Chosen Andronicus, surnamed Pius

For many good and great deserts to Rome.




óAct I, scene i, lines 20-23 


Andronicus is the Titus Andronicus of the tide. The surname of "Pius" was sometimes used in Roman history to indicate a man who was devout and who honored his parents and his gods. The most famous case of such a usage is that of Emperor Antoninus Pius, who reigned from 138 to 161 and whose reign saw the Roman Empire at its most peaceful. 


Ö the barbarous Goths




The special claim of Titus Andronicus to the gratitude of Rome lay in the wars he had been fighting. Marcus says: 


He by the senate is accited home

From weary wars against the barbarous Goths.




óAct I, scene i, lines 27-28 


Furthermore, the war has been going on a long time, as Marcus further explains: 


Ten years are spent since first he undertook

This cause of Rome, and chastised with arms

Our enemies' pride:





óAct I, scene i, lines 31-33 


The Goths were a group of Germanic tribes who began raiding the Roman Empire about the middle of the third century, not long after the time of Caracalla. They were badly defeated in 269 by the Roman Emperor Claudius II, who called himself Claudius Gothicus in consequence, but who died the year after. 
The Gothic menace lightened for a century thereafter. In 375, however, a group of these Goths (of tribes known as Visigoths) were driven into the Roman Empire by the Huns. Within the border of the Empire, they defeated the Romans in a great battle at Adrianople in 378. Theodosius, whom we have mentioned earlier, then ascended the Roman throne and managed to contain the Gothic menace by diplomacy and judicious bribery, rather than by military victories. 
After Theodosius' death, the Visigoths raided Italy and took Rome itself in 410. They were not defeated at this tune but wandered out of Italy of their own accord and finally set up a kingdom in southern France that eventually expanded into and over all Spam. In 489 another branch of the Gothic nation, the Ostrogoths, invaded Italy and set up a kingdom there. 
Up to this point, there isn't much hope of finding any Roman that can serve as an inspiration for Titus Andronicus. Nowhere is there a general who fought long wars against the Goths and won. We must look still later in time.
In the prose story The Tragical History of Titus Andronicus, the Goths are said to have invaded Italy under their king "Tottilius." 
Actually there was a king of the Ostrogoths, of nearly that name, who fought in Italy. He was Totila, who ruled from 541 to 552. 
Here is what happened. Although the Germanic tribes had settled the Western provinces of the Roman Empire, the Eastern provinces remained intact and were ruled from Constantinople. In 527 Justinian became Roman Emperor in Constantinople and was determined to reconquer the West. In 535 he sent his great general, Belisarius, to Italy, and with that began a twenty-year (not a mere ten-year) war of Roman and Goth, in which the Romans were eventually victorious. 
Belisarius won initial victories, but the Goths rallied when Totila became king. Belisarius was recalled and replaced with another general, Narses (a eunuch, the only one of importance in military history), who finally defeated Totila in 552 and completed the conquest of Italy in 556. In the Tragical History Titus Andronicus was a governor of Greece and came from Greece to rescue Italy, and that fits too. 
Again, the name "Andronicus" is best known in history as that of several emperors who ruled in Constantinople, so that the very name of Titus Andronicus focuses our attention on the Eastern part of the Roman Empire. Finally, both Belisarius and Narses were ill requited by ungrateful emperors, and the tale of Titus Andronicus tells how the general of the title is ill requited by an ungrateful Emperor. 
We can suppose then that Titus Andronicus was inspired by the events of the tune of Belisarius and Narses, but none of the events in the play actually match the events in history. 


Half of the number.. .




The two royal brothers retire before the awesome name of the victorious general. 
In comes Titus Andronicus with a coffin and draws sad attention to his family's sufferings in the wars: 


Ö of five and twenty valiant sons,

Half of the number that King Priam had,

Behold the poor remains, alive and dead!





óAct I, scene i, lines 79-81 


Priam is, of course, the King of Troy (see page I-79) whom legend credited with fifty sons. Of Titus' twenty-five sons, no less than twenty have died in the course of the ten-year war with the Goths. The twenty-first is brought back dead in his coffin from the latest battle, while the last four living sons attend it sorrowfully. 
Also with them are Tamora, the captured Queen of the Goths, and her three sons. 


Ö the dreadful shore of Styx




Andronicus' first care is to bury the dead son with due pagan rites. He reproaches himself for being so slow to do it: 


Titus, unkind and careless of thine own,

Why suffer'st thou thy sons, unburied yet,

To hover on the dreadful shore of Styx?




óAct I, scene i, lines 86-88 


The Styx is the river that marks the boundary of Hades. The shades of dead men cannot cross that river till they have been buried with the proper ritual, and must till then hover disconsolately on its shore. 


Ö ScythiaÖ




Andronicus' sons demand that a human sacrifice be dedicated on the occasion of the funeral of their dead brother so that his soul may rest in peace. (An example of why the play cannot be placed in a Christian setting.) 
Titus Andronicus orders Alarbus, the oldest son of Tamora, Queen of the Goths, to be so sacrificed. Tamora pleads against it in a speech that can't help but appeal to us, but the stern Titus insists, not out of cruelty but out of what he conceives to be religious devotion. 
Chiron, Tamora's youngest son, cries out: 


Was never Scythia half so barbarous.




óAct I, scene i, line 131 


When Greece was at its height, the Scythians were a nomadic people who lived on the plains north of the Black Sea. The Greeks knew little about them, but knew the area they inhabited to be tremendous and their numbers large. They were for some reason considered the epitome of bar-barousness by the Greeks, and their name, so maligned, has been used in that fashion ever since.


Ö the Thracian tyrant.. .




Tamora's remaining son, Demetrius, sounds a darker note: 


The selfsame gods that armed the Queen of Troy

With opportunity of sharp revenge

Upon the Thracian tyrant in his tent

May favor Tamora, the Queen of Goths,





óAct I, scene i, lines 136-39 


The Trojan Queen is Hecuba (see page I-85), who had sent her youngest son, Polydorus, for safekeeping to the court of the Thracian king, Polymnestor. After the fall of Troy, when all of Hecuba's other children were killed (save Helenus), Polymnestor was persuaded by the Greeks to kill Polydorus too. 
Hecuba discovered this and persuaded Polymnestor to visit destroyed Troy by promising to reveal to him a treasure in its ruins. He came to Troy with his two sons and, according to the tale, Hecuba in a fit of despairing fury managed to stab his two sons to death and tear out Polymnestor's eyes. 
Nevertheless, the sacrifice takes place and Lucius, the oldest of Titus' remaining sons, announces the result in triumphant goriness: 


Alarbus' limbs are lopped,

And entrails feed the sacrificing fires,




óAct I, scene i, lines 143-44 


With that, the tale of double revenge begins-first Tamora's and then Titus'. And Demetrius' allusion to Hecuba indicates the crude and brutal bloodiness of what is ahead. 


Ö to Solan's happiness




Titus' twenty-first son is thus buried and his brother, Marcus, points out (prophetically) that it is safer to be dead: 


Ö safer triumph is this funeral pomp,

That hath aspired to Salon's happiness.




óAct I, scene i, lines 176-77 


This refers to the tale (probably apocryphal) of the visit of the great Athenian lawgiver, Solon, to the Asia Minor kingdom of Lydia. The rich king of Lydia, Croesus, displayed his treasures to Solon and then asked the Greek if this was not happiness indeed. Solon replied, sternly, "Call no man happy till he is dead." In other words, while there is life there is the possibility of disaster. 
Of course, the disasters come. Croesus is defeated by Cyrus the Persian, his country is taken away, his throne is lost, and he himself is placed at the stake to be burned to death. Then he remembers Solon's remark and calls out the Athenian's name. The curious Cyrus asks the details and, on hearing the story, spares Croesus' life. 


Ö the sacred Pantheon.. .




The throne is offered Titus Andronicus, who refuses it on the ground that he is too old. The sons of the old Emperor now show signs of breaking into rivalry again, but Andronicus ends it by speaking for Saturninus, the elder. He calls him: 


Lord Saturnine; whose virtues will, I hope,

Reflect on Rome as Titan's rays on Earth,





óAct I, scene i, lines 225-26 


Titan is, of course, one of the names for the sun (see page I-11). Saturninus is promptly crowned and as promptly shows his gratitude: 


Titus, to advance Thy name and honorable family,

Lavinia will I make my empress.

Rome's royal mistress, mistress of my heart,

And in the sacred Pantheon her espouse.





óAct I, scene i, lines 238-42 


Lavinia is Titus' daughter, noble and virtuous. Her name recalls a Lavinia of Roman legend, the daughter of Latinus, who was king of that region in Italy where Rome was later to be founded. The Trojan hero Aeneas, coming to Italy from fallen Troy (see page I-20), married Lavinia and founded the city of Lavinium, named in her honor. Lavinium was the parent city of Alba Longa and that, in turn, was the parent city of Rome. 
A pantheon ("all gods") is any building dedicated to the gods generally. The Pantheon is in Rome, a structure first built under the sponsorship of Agrippa (see page I-340), the general and son-in-law of Octavius Caesar, in 27 b.c. It was rebuilt in its present form about a.d. 120 by the Emperor Hadrian. It is the one Roman building that remains in perfect preservation and it is still a place of worship, having been consecrated a Christian church in 609. In the time of Belisarius, then, it was in its last century as a pagan temple (though by that time there were virtually no pagans left in Italy). 


Ö the stately Phoebe. ..




All seems well and then, with the suddenness of a summer thunderstorm, everything falls apart. 
Bassianus, the new Emperor's younger brother, sets up a cry that Lavinia is his and begins to carry her away. Lavinia's four brothers are on Bassianus' side in this-apparently there is a recognized betrothal here, although no hint of that was given earlier-and so is Lavinia's uncle, Marcus. 
Only Titus Andronicus stands out against them in rigid observance of his honor, for he has formally given Lavinia to Saturninus. 
Titus dashes after his sons and kills Mutius, one of them. This is the twenty-second son of Titus to die. 
Saturninus, however, orders Andronicus to make no further attempt to get Lavinia back. He has suddenly fallen in love with Tamora anyway and prefers to have the Gothic Queen as his wife. He describes her as: 


Ö lovely Tamora, Queen of Goths,

That like the stately Phoebe 'mongst her nymphs

Dost overshine the gallant'st dames of Rome,





óAct I, scene i, lines 316-18 


This comparison to Phoebe (see page I-12), goddess of the moon (with alternate names like Selene, Diana, and Artemis), seems odd. Tamora is no young maid who might aptly be compared to the virginal goddess, but is the widowed mother of three grown sons. 
Nevertheless, Saturninus prepares to marry her at once: 


Sith priest and holy water are so near,

And tapers burn so bright and everything

In readiness for Hymenaeus stand,





óAct I, scene i, lines 324-26 


Hymenaeus is a longer form of Hymen, god of marriage (see page I-55). 


Ö wise Laertes' son




Titus Andronicus, defied by his family and snubbed by the Emperor who owes him everything, suddenly finds himself alone and dishonored, only minutes after he had been offered the imperial crown itself. 
Yet Titus sticks to honor. He is even unwilling to have his dead son buried in the family tomb because he died opposing Titus' conception of proper obedience to the Emperor. Marcus, however, argues: 


The Greeks upon advice did bury Ajax

That slew himself; and wise Laertes' son

Did graciously plead for his funerals:





óAct I, scene i, lines 380-82 


Ajax and Ulysses contended for the armor of Achilles after the latter's death (see page I-110). When Ulysses received the award, Ajax went mad and killed himself. Marcus points out that the Greeks, despite the dishonor of Ajax's last deeds, his madness and suicide, finally decided to give him honorable burial in view of the greatness of his earlier deeds. Ulysses himself (who is "Laertes' son") argued in favor of that. 
Given this precedent, Titus allows the burial of his twenty-second son. 
Other reconciliations are also made. Tamora, the new Empress, plays the role of peacemaker, reconciling the Emperor Saturninus with his younger brother, Bassianus (now married to Lavinia), and with his general, Titus Andronicus. (Nevertheless, she promises her new husband, in an aside, to take proper revenge on them all in due time.) 
Titus Andronicus accepts the new peace and suggests a great hunt for the next day. 


Ö Prometheus tied to Caucasus




All now leave the stage after the single action-packed scene of the first act, and one person alone remains to begin the second act, a person who has been on stage most of the first act but who till now has not spoken a single line. It is Aaron the Moor. Behind his existence is some complicated background. 
The ancient Greeks could not help but notice that the inhabitants of the southern shores of the Mediterranean were somewhat darker in complexion than they themselves were. There would be a tendency to call the inhabitants of northern Africa "the dark ones." 
The Greek word for "dark" is mauros, and this name came to be applied to north Africans. In Latin the word became maurus and this was the origin, in particular, of the name of a kingdom on the northwestern shoulder of the African continent, which came to be called Mauretania- the kingdom over which Cleopatra's daughter ruled in Augustus' time (see page I-385).
From the Latin maurus, came the French Maures, the Spanish Moros and the English "Moors." In the eighth century armies from north Africa (now Moslem in religion) invaded Spain and southern France. In the ninth century they invaded Sicily and Italy. Europeans came to know the Moors with a discomforting intimacy. 
(There was a tendency for the Spaniards, who did not evict the Moors till nearly eight centuries had passed after their first invasion, to apply the name to all Moslems. In 1565 they occupied the Philippine Islands and were astonished to find tribes in the southern islands who were Moslems. Two centuries before the Spaniards came, Moslem traders had been visiting the islands and Moslem missionaries had converted the natives. The Spaniards called these southern Filipinos Moros, and the name is retained even today.) 
In the fifteenth century, the Portuguese mariners, exploring down the coasts of west Africa, brought back black slaves and there began a new version of the abominable practice of human slavery. Since it was customary to call Africans "Moors," this new variety of African was called "black Moors" or "blackamoors." And then, to save syllables, they might still be called simply "Moors." 
Aaron, in this play, though called a Moor, is distinctly a blackamoor, as we can tell from numerous illusions. The likelihood of a black being present in the Italy of Belisarius' time is not entirely zero. After all, the power of the East Roman Emperor, Justinian, extended far up the Nile. Why he should be associated with the Gothic armies is more puzzling-but then there is no question of any historical accuracy. He is introduced merely as a convenient villain. 
A "Moor" would make a wonderful villain and an inhuman one at that. To the Elizabethans, the strange and therefore repulsive features of a black face and the habit of equating blackness with the devil made blacks a natural stereotype for villainy. (Such irrational thinking on the part of whites has caused innumerable blacks innumerable separate agonies then and since.) 
Aaron ruminates on Tamora's sudden climb to the peak but is not disturbed thereby. Her rise is his as well, and he tells himself to: 


fit thy thoughts

To mount aloft with thy imperial mistress,

And mount her pitch, whom thou in triumph long

Hast prisoner held, fettered in amorous chains,

And faster bound to Aaron's charming eyes

Than is Prometheus tied to Caucasus.





óAct II, scene i, lines 12-17 


Prometheus was a Titan who stole fire from the sun and gave it to poor shivering mortals, in defiance of a decree of Zeus. In punishment Zeus chained him with divine, unbreakable fetters to Mount Caucasus (which Greeks imagined to be somewhere east of the Black Sea, and which gave its name to the Caucasian range of mountains which is really there.) 
The fact that Tamora is so in love with Aaron mirrors another convention that was found in the literature of the time. Whites seemed to imagine that black men had some unusual power of attraction over white women; perhaps because of their supposedly more primitive "animal" nature and therefore their supposedly more powerful sexual prowess. 


Ö this Semiramis.. .




Aaron goes on to glory in the prospect of what will come. He expects 


To wanton with this queen,

This goddess, this Semiramis, this nymph,

This siren, that will charm Rome's Saturnine

And see his shipwrack and his commonweal's.





óAct II, scene i, lines 21-24 


In 810 b.c. a queen, Sammu-rammat, ruled the kingdom of Assyria. She didn't rule either long or effectively, and Assyria was, at the time, rather weak. In the next century, however, Assyria rose to world power and dominated western Asia with its fearful and ruthless armies. 
The dun memory that mighty and terrifying Assyria was once ruled by a woman seemed to impress the Greeks, for they distorted Sammu-rammat to Semiramis and began to weave legends around her. She was supposed to have been a great conquering monarch, who founded Babylon, established a huge empire, reigned forty-two years, and even tried to conquer India. 
As if this were not enough to render her colorful, the Greeks also imagined her to be a monster of lust and luxury with numerous lovers and insatiable desires, so that the name "Semiramis" has come to be applied to any lustful woman in high place. 


Ö Vulcan's badge




Aaron's soliloquy is interrupted by Tamora's two remaining sons, Chiron and Demetrius, who have suddenly decided, each one of them, to fall in love with Lavinia and are now quarreling over it. Aaron reminds them that she is the wife of Bassianus, the Emperor's brother. This does not bother Demetrius, who says:


Though Bassianus be the Emperor's brother,

Better than he have worn Vulcan's badge.





óAct II, scene i, lines 88-89 


This is a reference to Vulcan's cuckoldry, thanks to the love affair of his wife, Venus, with Mars (see page I-11). 
Aaron thinks the quarrel is foolish. Why don't they both enjoy Lavinia in turn? To do this, persuasion will not be enough, for, as he says: 


Lucrece was not more chaste

Than this Lavinia,





óAct II, scene i, lines 108-9 


Lucrece, of course, is the Roman matron who was dealt with in The Rape of Lucrece (see page I-205), and is Shakespeare's favorite symbol of chastity. (The Rape of Lucrece was written at just about the time Titus Andronicus was. Might it be that this line set Shakespeare to thinking of the poem, or was it that the poem was running on in his mind and inspired this line?) 
There are other ways than persuasion to win Lavinia, however. Coolly, Aaron points out that in the course of the next day's hunt, they might ambush her and rape her in turn. The two Gothic princes agree enthusiastically. 


Saturn is dominatorÖ




Time moves on and the hunt starts. During its course, Aaron finds a spot in the forest where he may hide a bag of gold for a nefarious purpose that is still in the future. 
Tamora comes upon him and urges him on to dalliance such as 


The wandering prince and Dido once enjoyed,





óAct II, scene iii, line 22 


This is another reference to Dido and Aeneas (see page I-20), a favorite mythical standby of Shakespeare's. 
Aaron, however, has more important business at hand. He says: 


Madam, though Venus govern your desires,

Saturn is dominator over mine:





óAct II, scene iii, lines 30-31 


Astrologically speaking, each person is born under the domination of a particular planet which determines the major component of his or her personality. The nature of the influence of Venus is obvious. 
Saturn is, of all the planets visible to the unaided eye, the farthest from Earth and therefore the most slowly moving among the stars. To be born under Saturn then is to be as heavy, grave, and gloomy as that slow-moving planet; to be "saturnine," in short. 


His Philomel. ..




Aaron goes on to explain why he is so grave and gloomy. Dire thoughts of revenge are in his mind and he refers to: 


My fleece of woolly hair that now uncurls

Even as an adder when she doth unroll

To do some fatal execution?





óAct II, scene iii, lines 34-36 


Mention of his "fleece of woolly hair" shows clearly that Shakespeare has in mind a black African and not the swarthy but non-black Moors of north Africa. 
Aaron goes on to specifics, indicating that he has set in motion a horrible fate for Lavinia. He says: 


This is the day of doom for Bassianus:

His Philomel must lose her tongue today,





óAct II, scene iii, lines 42-43 


One of the more gruesome Greek myths deals with two sisters: Philomela and Procne, who were the daughters of a king of Athens. The latter was given in marriage to Tereus, the King of Thrace. Tereus, however, fell in love with Philomela, his sister-in-law, and, luring her to his court, raped her. Then, in order to prevent her from telling his crime, he cut her tongue out and hid her among his slaves. 
The phrase "lose her tongue" can therefore be a metaphoric reference to rape. It turns out to be a literal forecast in this play. 


Ö as was Actaeon'sÖ




Aaron gives Tamora a letter to be used later in the development of his plan and leaves. 
At this point, Bassianus and Lavinia enter. All are at the hunt, of course, and Tamora, in her hunting costume, is sardonically likened to Diana, the goddess of the hunt, by Bassianus. Tamora is offended at what she considers to be their spying and says: 


Had I the power that some sayDion had

Thy temples should be planted presently

With horns, as was Actaeon's, and the hounds

Should drive upon thy new-transformed limbs,





óAct II, scene iii, lines 61-64 


Actaeon was a hunter in the Greek myths, who, in the course of a hunt, came inadvertently upon Diana bathing. Admiring, he stopped to watch. When he was caught at his peeping by Diana's nymphs, the indignant goddess turned him into a stag so that his own hounds ran him down and killed him. 
The reference to the horns on Bassianus' head undoubtedly has the secondary purpose of referring to the planned rape of his wife. 


.. your swart Cimmerian




Bassianus and Lavinia strike back by implying that Tamora has been surprised at something far less innocent than bathing and speak openly of her liaison with Aaron. Bassianus says: 


Believe me, Queen, your swart Cimmerian

Doth make your honor of his body's hue,





óAct II, scene iii, lines 72-73 


The Scythians, who lived north of the Black Sea (see page I-397), ar-rived there only in 700 b.c. Before that, the land was populated by those whom Homer named the Cimmerians. (Crimea, the peninsula jutting into he northern rim of the Black Sea, is thought to derive its name from hem.) 
The Cimmerian regions were mistily distant to the Greeks of Homer's time and strange legends arose concerning them. They were supposed to live in a land of eternal mist and gloom where the sun never shone. (One wonders if explorers brought back tales of the polar regions.) 
As a result, one speaks of "Cimmerian darkness" as expressing the ultimate in darkness. Aaron is a "Cimmerian" not because he comes from the Far North, but because his skin is so dark. 


.. Cocytus" misty mouth




But now the cruel machinations of Aaron begin to work.
Tamora's two sons, Chiron and Demetrius, enter. Tamora tells them that she has been lured to the spot by Bassianus and Lavinia for evil purposes. The two Gothic princes promptly stab Bassianus, hide his body in a deep pit, and drag Lavinia offstage to rape her, each in turn, with Tamora egging them on fiendishly. She refuses the girl's pleas for mercy, reminding her of how Titus Andronicus had refused her own pleas for mercy for her oldest son. 
She leaves and Aaron enters, guiding Quintus and Martius, two of Andronicus' three remaining sons. Martius slips into the pit in which Bassianus' body is hidden and while Quintus leans over anxiously to find out if he is hurt, Aaron slips away. 
Martius discovers the body of Bassianus and is horrified. He says: 


So pale did shine the moon on Pyramus,

When he by night lay bathed in maiden blood.

O brother, help me with thy fainting hand-

If fear hath made thee faint, as me it hath-

Out of this fell devouring receptacle

As hateful as Cocytus' misty mouth.





óAct II, scene iii, lines 231-36 


Pyramus was an ill-fated lover in the ancient tale, who died by moonlight (see page I-23). Cocytus is one of the five rivers of the underworld and its name means "wailing." It is meant to symbolize the sorrow of death. 


A craftier Tereus...




The horrors continue. Aaron brings the Emperor Saturninus on the scene and Quintus and Martius are found with Bassianus' body. The forged letter, prepared by Aaron, is produced to make it seem that the two had bribed a huntsman to kill Bassianus. The bribe in the shape of the bag of gold Aaron had planted on the scene is also produced. 
Titus' sons, having been effectively framed, are dragged off to imprisonment at once. 
All leave and Tamora's sons now emerge. They have raped Lavinia and have cut out her tongue to prevent her telling. They have, however, gone the old Greek myth one better, for they have cut off her hands as well. Chiron says, with sadistic humor: 


Write down thy mind, bewray thy meaning so,

And if thy stumps will let thee play the scribe.





óAct II, scene iv, lines 3-4


The princes leave, and Marcus, the brother of Titus Andronicus, comes upon the scene and discovers Lavinia. He grasps the meaning of the sight at once and says: 


Fair Philomela, why she but lost her tongue,

And in a tedious sampler sewed her mind:

But lovely niece, that mean is cut from thee;

A craftier Tereus, cousin, hast thou met,

And he hath cut those pretty fingers off,

That could have better sewed than Philomel.





óAct II, scene iv, lines 38-43 


In the Greek myth, Philomela had had her tongue cut out and been placed in the slaves' quarters. She could use her hands to reveal her secret, however, for she prepared a tapestry in which she wove the legend, "Philomela is among the slaves." This was delivered to her sister, Procne, who took instant action, liberating Philomela and preparing revenge. 
By cutting off Lavinia's hands, the villainous princes had deprived her of Philomela's chance. 
Marcus Andronicus finds it hard to believe anyone could have mangled so fair a person as Lavinia. Concerning the malefactor, Marcus says that 


Ö had he heard the heavenly harmony

Which that sweet tongue hath made,

He would have dropped his knife, and fell asleep

As Cerberus at the Thracian poet's feet.





óAct II, scene iv, lines 48-51 


Orpheus, the sweet-singing minstrel from Thrace ("the Thracian poet"), descended into the underworld in order to win back his dead love, Eurydice (see page I-47). On approaching Cerberus (see page I-101), the three-headed hellhound who guarded the entrance, he sang so soft and sweet a lullaby that even that horrible creature fell asleep and let him pass unharmed. 


Ö Tarquin and his queen




Unimaginable miseries now heap themselves on Titus Andronicus. His two sons, Quintus and Martius, are being led to execution and no one will hear his pleas on their behalf. His one remaining son, Lucius, has tried to rescue his brothers by force, has failed, and is sentenced to exile. Marcus then brings him the mutilated Lavinia and Titus breaks into fresh woe. 
All is interrupted by Aaron, who brings the news that if one of the Andronici, Titus, Marcus, or Lucius, will sacrifice a hand, that hand would be accepted as an exchange for the lives of Titus' two sons, who would then be returned free. After an argument over which Andronicus should make the sacrifice, Titus wins out and his hand is struck off. 
This is but to add to the sorrows of Titus, however, for his stricken hand is soon returned and with it the heads of his two sons, who had been executed anyway. Of all Titus' children, there now remain only Lucius and the mutilated Lavinia. 
Tamora has had ample revenge for the loss of her son and now it is Titus who begins to plan revenge. So does Lucius, still under sentence of exile. Alone on the stage, he plans to go abroad and raise an army against Rome, saying to his absent father, in soliloquy: 
// Lucius live, he will requite your wrongs, And make proud Saturnine and his empress Beg at the gates, like Tarquin and his queen. 
óAct III, scene i, lines 296-98 
Tarquin was the last king of ancient Rome, who was expelled from Rome in 509 b.c. (see page I-211). He had occasion to stand at the gates of Rome in an attempt to get the throne back, and failed. To be sure, he didn't beg in the usual sense of the word. He had an army at his back. 
The idea of revenge by means of an outside army fits in just a little with the time of Belisarius and Narses. Belisarius himself never attempted revenge against the ungrateful Emperor Justinian, even though legend has him reduced, toward the end of his life, to begging in the streets. (The legend has no basis in truth, however.) 
Belisarius' successor, Narses, is a different matter. He ruled Italy into extreme old age, and after Justinian's death, when Narses was more than ninety years old, the aged general was ordered home. According to the legend (probably not true) his recall was accompanied by an insulting message. He was told that since he was a eunuch, he should return and confine himself to spinning wool with the palace maidens. 
The insulted Narses said, "I will spin them such a skein as they will not easily unravel" and invited the barbarous Lombards to invade Italy-which they did most effectively. 


Ö Cornelia never with more care




The play now shifts to the Andronicus house. For the first time, a grandson of Titus appears. He is a son of Lucius and is also named Lucius. 
Young Lucius enters, carrying books and running. Mute Lavinia is running after him. The boy is frightened but Titus and Marcus catch and comfort him, assuring him that Lavinia means him no harm, and loves him. Titus says: 


Ah, boy, Cornelia never with more care

Read to her sons than she hath read to thee

Sweet poetry and Tully's Orator.




óAct IV, scene i, lines 12-14 


The Cornelia referred to was a daughter of Publius Cornelius Scipio, the Roman general who finally defeated Hannibal in 202 b.c. Cornelia was considered the model of the virtuous Roman matron, chaste, honorable, and loving-and utterly devoted to her two sons. 
These two sons received the finest education available at the time. So proud was she of them that when another Roman matron, on a visit, displayed her jewelry and asked to see Cornelia's, the latter merely pointed to her sons. "These are my jewels," she said. 
As for Tully, that is a name by which the great Roman orator Marcus Tullius Cicero (see page I-268) is sometimes known in English. One of his famous works was De Oratore (Concerning the Orator), and it is to this that Titus refers. 


Ö Ovid's Metamorphoses




But Lavinia stirs the books that young Lucius has let fall, concentrating on one, which the boy identifies for his grandfather: 


Grandsire, 'tis Ovid's Metamorphoses:

My mother gave it me.





óAct IV, scene i, lines 42-43 


One of the myths contained in Metamorphoses (see page I-8), which deals with tales of transformations of human beings into other forms, is that of Philomela and Procne, for in the end, Philomela is turned into a nightingale and Procne into a swallow. Lavinia wants to find that tale in order to have Titus and Marcus understand that her mutilation was the result of a rape. 
Clearly, this shows haste on Shakespeare's part. After all, Marcus has guessed as much when he first encountered Lavinia after the mutilation. He then said: 


But, sure, some Tereus hath deflowered thee,

And, lest thou shouldst detect him, cut thy tongue.





óAct II, scene iv, lines 26-27 


It now occurs to Marcus that a person can write with a stick in the sand by holding that stick in his mouth and guiding it with his wrists. Hands are not required at all. Lavinia uses this method to reveal that Chiron and Demetrius are the guilty ones. Now Titus is certain against whom he must plan revenge. 


Ö not Enceladus




Apparently considerable time has elapsed since the beginning of the play, for Tamora is about to have a baby and it is to be presumed that the Emperor Saturninus is the father. However, events have miscarried. It is Aaron, not Saturninus who is the father, and this is shown all too plainly in that the baby is a black infant. 
Naturally, this fact must be hidden, or Tamora's infidelity will be plain even to Saturninus and she will be destroyed. The Nurse who attended Tamora brings the baby to Aaron, with instructions from Tamora to kill it and destroy the evidence. 
But Aaron, in this one respect, departs from the line of flat villainy. He becomes a proud father and in words that strangely fore-echo the pride of the black activists of the 1960s, cries out to the Nurse, who is expressing disgust at the child: 


Zounds, ye whore! Is black so base a hue?

Sweet blowze, you are a beauteous blossom, sure.





óAct IV, scene ii, lines 71-72 


When Chiron and Demetrius, who are also present, offer to kill their baby half brother to secure their mother's safety, Aaron draws his sword fiercely, saying: 


I tell you, younglings, not Enceladus,

With all his threat'ning band of Typhon's brood,

Nor great Alcides, nor the god of war,

Shall seize this prey out of his father's hands.





óAct IV, scene ii, lines 93-96 


Enceladus was one of a brood of tremendous giants (with serpents for legs) which were brought forth by Mother Earth, who was annoyed to see Jupiter (Zeus) and his fellow gods destroy the Titans, for the Titans had been her children. 
The giants, under Enceladus' leadership, fought the gods in a battle which, in the versions that reach us, seem to be described as a burlesque of Homer-almost a comic retelling of a myth, with grotesque exaggerations. For instance, Enceladus is killed by Athena, who throws a huge mountain at him; a mountain that flattens him and becomes the island of Sicily. 
Aaron's remark makes it seem that Enceladus and the other giants are the offspring of Typhon, but this is not so. Typhon was born after the defeat of the giants and was the greatest and most fearful monster of all. Typhon engaged Jupiter in a great duel and was almost victor, for he cut out and hid the sinews of Jupiter's hands and feet and paralyzed the great god. It wasn't till Mercury (Hermes), the god of thieves, stole back the sinews and restored Jupiter's powers of movement that Typhon was finally killed by the lightning bolts of the king of the gods. 
After the mention of Enceladus and Typhon, to go on to Alcides (Hercules) and the god of war (Mars) seems distinct anticlimax. 
The Gothic princes wilt before Aaron's fury and ask him what he means to do. His first act is to kill the Nurse, thus reducing, by one, the number of those who know the secret. He then prepares to change the baby for a white one who will be made heir to the throne while Aaron will secretly raise his own black baby to become a warrior. 


Ö one of Taurus' horns




In preparing his revenge, Titus feigns madness, meanwhile, in order to throw Saturninus and Tamora off the scent and lull them into a false security. Titus' madness (and surely he has suffered enough to make the onset of madness plausible) consists of a wild search for justice through Heaven and Hell. He cries out: 


I'll dive into the burning lake below,

And pull her [justice] out of Acheron by the heels.




óAct IV, scene iii, lines 44-45 


The Acheron is another of the rivers of Hades. (Two others, Styx and Cocytus, have already been mentioned in this play.) 
Titus goes on to bemoan the physical shortcomings of the Andronici, in the face of so huge an undertaking as the search for justice. He says to his brother: 


Marcus, we are but shrubs, no cedars we,

No big-boned men framed of the Cyclops' size.




óAct IV, scene iii, lines 46-47 


The Cyclopes were one-eyed giants who forged the lightning for Jupiter. They were also a race of giants who lived on Sicily in the time of the Trojan War. At least Ulysses, on his return from Troy, falls in with one of them in particular, Polyphemus, and defeats him-one of the best-known events in the Odyssey. 
The main thrust of the search for justice, however, consists in shooting arrows into the sky with letters attached; letters that plead with the gods for justice. Titus has all the Andronici helping him in this respect. He advances his own apparent madness by pretending to see the effects of the action in the constellations, which he describes as though having literal existence. 
He exclaims to young Lucius: 


Good boy, in Virgo's lap; give it Pallas.





óAct IV, scene iii, line 65 


To Publius, the son of Marcus, he says: 


Publius, Publius, what hast thou done!

See, see, thou hast shot off one of Taurus' horns.





óAct IV, scene iii, lines 69-70 


Virgo (the Maiden) and Taurus (the Bull) are both included among the signs of the zodiac. Very likely most of Shakespeare's audience did suspect that the imaginary creatures pieced out in the sky by the imaginary lines connecting stars existed there in literal truth. The humor lay in the thought that man-hurled arrows could reach them. (Pallas, by the way, is an alternate name for the Greek goddess Athena.) 
Marcus keeps the play at madness going. He says to Titus: 


Ö When Publius shot,

The bull being galled, gave Aries such a knock

That down fell both the Ram's horns in the court,

And who should find them but the Empress' villain? [Aaron]

She [Tamora] laughed, and told the Moor he should not

choose But give them to his master for a present.





óAct IV, scene iii, lines 71-76 


Aries (the Ram) is also a constellation of the zodiac. It neighbors Taurus so that one can well imagine the Bull charging the Ram. It enables Marcus to get off a kind of joke beloved by the Elizabethans, concerning the cuckolding of the Emperor.


Ö as ever Coriolanus did




If it is Titus' plan to lull the Emperor and Empress into total security, it falls short. Saturninus is furious at the letters of appeal to the heavens, since they end in Rome's streets where they are found by the people, who grow to sympathize with the ill-treated Titus. 
The Emperor is further irritated by a Clown (a lowborn person, that is) who delivers a message to him from Titus. The Emperor forthwith orders the Clown hanged. 
He prepares to go further and have Titus arrested, when a messenger arrives to say that a Gothic army is at the gates of Rome: 


They hither march amain, under conduct

Of Lucius, son to old Andronicus;

Who threats, in course of this revenge, to do

As much as ever Coriolanus did.





óAct IV, scene iv, lines 66-69 


Coriolanus was a legendary figure in early Roman history who, out of revenge for what he considered mistreatment, raised an enemy army, placed himself at its head, and laid siege to Rome. Fifteen years after Shakespeare wrote Titus Andronicus he wrote Coriolanus about the earlier event (see page I-245). 
Tamora, however, promises to make Lucius into a Coriolanus indeed. Coriolanus withdrew without taking Rome because his mother begged him to (see page I-250). Now Tamora intends to try to persuade Titus to beg his son to withdraw. (She is not aware that Titus has discovered the full extent of the villainy of her sons.) 


Ö worse than Procne Ö




The scene shifts to the outskirts of Rome, where Lucius is leading the Gothic army to the city's walls. A Goth has captured Aaron, who has been trying to find a place of safety for his baby. Lucius, when Aaron is brought to him, threatens to hang father and child, and, to save the baby, Aaron confesses all. 
Meanwhile, Tamora has worked out her plan to persuade Titus to call off his son. She proposes to take advantage of his madness by disguising herself as Revenge and her two sons as Rape and Murder (that is, as spirits specifically designed to avenge those two crimes). 
In her guise as Revenge, Tamora promises to make mad Titus quits with all his enemies and asks him, in turn, to send for his son, Lucius, to attend a feast which Titus will give. It will then be Revenge's part (supposedly) to bring in the Emperor, the Empress, and the Empress' sons for Titus to wreak vengeance upon. (Actually, it is Tamora's plan, once she has Lucius with Titus, to have both killed, and then somehow to arrange to have the leaderless Goths dispersed.) 
Titus pretends to fall in with this plan and sends Marcus to invite Lucius to the feast. 
But then, when Revenge turns to leave, Titus insists on keeping Rape and Murder. Otherwise, he says, he will call back Marcus and leave things as they were. Tamora orders her sons to humor him and leaves by herself. 
Once Tamora is gone, Titus instantly calls his friends and orders Rape and Murder tied up. They announce themselves to be the Empress' sons, hoping this will awe their assailants, but Titus merely orders them gagged. He then tells them what he intends to do by way of revenge, saying: 


For worse than Philomel you used my daughter,

And worse than Procne I will be revenged.





óAct V, scene ii, lines 195-96 


When Procne discovered what her husband, Tereus, had done to Philomela, she took a horrible revenge. She killed Itys, the young son of Tereus and herself, boiled his flesh, and fed it to Tereus. 
This Titus intended to surpass. They had cut off not only the tongue but the hands of Lavinia. In return, Titus intended to have their mother feed on not one, but two sons. 
With that, he cuts the throats of Chiron and Demetrius, catching the blood in a basin held by Lavinia. 


Ö rash Virginius




The feast begins now. All are present (even Aaron and his baby). Titus, dressed as a cook, poses the Emperor a question: 


Was it well done of rash Virginius

To slay his daughter with his own right hand,

Because she was enforced, stained, and deflow'red?





óAct V, scene iii, lines 36-38 


Virginius was a plebeian soldier who, according to legend, lived about 450 b.c. (a generation after Coriolanus). His beautiful daughter, Virginia, attracted the attention of Appius Claudius, a patrician who was then the most powerful man in Rome. Appius Claudius planned to seize the girl by having false witnesses testify that the girl was actually the daughter of one of his slaves and was therefore also his slave. 
The distracted Virginius, seeing no way of stopping Appius Claudius, suddenly stabbed his daughter to death in the midst of the trial, proclaiming that only through death could he save her honor. 
Titus Andronicus states the situation erroneously, by the way. Virginius' daughter was not "enforced, stained, and deflow'red." She was merely threatened with that. 
Saturninus says that Virginius was justified in his action, whereupon Titus promptly stabs Lavinia to death. When Saturninus angrily demands the reason for that action, Titus says she has been raped by Chiron and Demetrius, and that they in turn have been killed and baked into a pie which the Empress is at that moment eating. 
Titus then stabs and kills Tamora; at which the Emperor Saturninus stabs and kills Titus; at which Lucius stabs and kills Saturninus. 


Ö what SinonÖ




A Roman Lord now asks Lucius what has brought Rome to this civil war and assassination: 


Tell us what Sinon hath bewitched our ears,

Or who hath brought the fatal engine in

That gives our Troy, our Rome, the civil wound





óAct V, scene iii, lines 85-87 


Sinon is the Greek who persuaded the Trojans to allow entry to the wooden horse ("the fatal engine") and made the final sack of the city possible (see page I-210). 


I do repentÖ




Lucius and Marcus, between them, now tell all the wrongs done the Andronici by the Emperor, the Empress, her sons, and Aaron. They even show Aaron's baby as proof of another kind of wickedness. 
The appalled Romans hail Lucius as the new Emperor and call in Aaron for punishment. Lucius orders that he be buried breast-deep in the earth and allowed to starve to death. 
Even now, Aaron refuses to crawl, and one can't help but feel a kind of sneaking admiration for his defiance. He says, ferociously, after having heard his doom:


/ am no baby, I, that with base prayers

I should repent the evils I have done:

Ten thousand worse than ever yet I did

Would I perform, if I might have my will:

If one good deed in all my life I did,

I do repent it from my very soul.





óAct V, scene iii, lines 185-90 


It is a fitly grisly speech to end a grisly play that opens with: 
(1) the dead body of one of Titus' sons, then continues with 
(2) the sacrifice of Tamora's son, Alarbus, by Lucius, 
(3) the stabbing of Mutius by his father, Titus, 
(4) the stabbing of Bassianus by Chiron and Demetrius, 
(5) the rape and mutilation of Lavinia by Chiron and Demetrius, 
(6) the mutilation of Titus by Aaron, 
(7) the execution of Martius and 
(8) Quintus, by order of the Emperor, 
(9) the stabbing of the Nurse by Aaron, 
(10) the hanging of a Clown for small offense by Saturninus' order, 
(11) the throat-cutting of Chiron and 
(12) Demetrius by Titus, 
(13) the unwitting cannibalism of Tamora, 
(14) the stabbing of Lavinia by Titus, 
(15) the stabbing of Tamora by Titus, 
(16) the stabbing of Titus by Saturninus, 
(17) the stabbing of Saturninus by Lucius, and finally, 
(18) the projected death by slow starvation of Aaron. 










Part III. Italian






14. Love's Labor's Lost


There are fifteen of Shakespeare's plays which deal with English history or English legend. If I adhered to strict chronological sequence, these would follow here. If I did that, however, the division between the two volumes of this book would fall inconveniently in the middle of those plays. I am consequently leaving the fifteen English plays to make up in toto the second volume. 
We will conclude this first volume then with a dozen romances which are placed in Renaissance Italy and surrounding regions, and which are, for Shakespeare, contemporary. There is no clear historical background and even where some reference can be pinpointed to this or that year, this is not significant and will not do as a method of deciding the order in which the plays should be presented. 
In this final part of the volume, then, the plays that remain will be placed in the order in which (it is thought) Shakespeare wrote them. 
And of these Love's Labor's Lost is possibly the earliest. Along with The Comedy of Errors it has sometimes been dated as early as 1588, though dates as late as 1593 are possible. 
The play doesn't seem to have been intended for wide public popularity, and may have been written for private performance. One possibility is that it was intended for a celebration at the home of the Earl of Southampton (see page I-3). If so, the play must have been an astounding success, for Southampton then became Shakespeare's generous patron. 
If Love's Labor's Lost were indeed written primarily for the entertainment of a coterie of men interested in art, that would explain the over-elaboration of much of the style. The play was a satire on pedantry, and its complicated verbiage and intrusive Latinity would appeal to the sense of humor of the educated. Both the elaborateness and the Latinity have tended to diminish the popularity of the play considerably in later times. 


Navarre shall beÖ




The play opens with a King and his three companions on stage. The King is announcing his decision to retire for three years (along with his companions) to a sober and austere study of philosophy. He is very optimistic about the effect this will have, for he says: 


Navarre shall be the wonder of the world;

Our court shall be a little academe,





óAct I, scene i, lines 12-13 


The speaker is, according to the cast of characters, Ferdinand, King of Navarre. 
Navarre does not exist as an independent kingdom on our maps today (or on the maps of Shakespeare's time, for that matter), and most people would be at a loss to point out where it might ever have existed. It is not a mythical land, however; it is no Ruritania. It once did exist indeed, and in medieval times it constituted a sizable region about the western end of the Pyrenees. Mostly, it lay to the south and west of that range in what is now north-central Spain, but some of its territory lay to the north in what is now southwestern France. 
Through the Middle Ages, it maintained an increasingly precarious independence between France on the north and the growing strength of the other Christian kingdoms of the Spanish peninsula. In 1474 Aragon and Castile (the two most important of those kingdoms) were bound together when Ferdinand, Crown Prince of Aragon, married Isabella, Queen of Castile. In 1479 Ferdinand succeeded to the crown of Aragon, and under the united rule of himself and Isabella, modern Spain was formed. (The two monarchs were the parents of Catherine, the ill-fated first wife of Henry VIII, see page II-754.) 
Navarre could not stand against the union of the kingdoms. The portion of Navarre south of the Pyrenees was occupied by Ferdinand in 1512 and made an integral part of the Spanish crown in 1515. 
The part of the kingdom north of the Pyrenees was under the rule of Catherine de Foix, who married Jean d'Albret (a descendant of the Constable of France, who had died at the Battle of Agincourt, see page II-475). Jean d'Albret called himself King of Navarre and his son succeeded to the title, as Henry II of Navarre, in 1517, when his mother died. 
Naturally, Ferdinand of Spam claimed the rule of all Navarre, but in order to establish that claim he would have had to fight France, which held the actual control of northern Navarre. This Ferdinand never tried to do, and Henry II remained titular King of Navarre. That is, he had the title but no more; in actual fact, he was merely a French nobleman and had none of the power of an independent monarch. 
Henry II married Margaret (or Marguerite, in the French spelling), who was sister to King Francis I (see page II-747). She is consequently known in history books as Margaret of Navarre, and it was she who, before this marriage, had been thought of by Wolsey as a possible second wife for Henry VIII (see page II-69). 
Henry had a daughter, Jeanne d'Albret, who was Queen of Navarre from 1562 to 1572. Her son was another Henry, who in 1572 became Henry III of Navarre, but is known to history simply as Henry of Navarre because, first, he was by far the most important ruler Navarre ever had, and second, because in his time the King of France was also Henry III and to use the same Roman numeral for both would lead to confusion. 
Through his father, Henry of Navarre was a member of the family of Bourbon, which, through a solid line of male ancestors, was descended from a younger son of King Louis IX (see page II-457) who had died in 1270. Now, three centuries later, only one male descendant remained of the older lines and he was Henry III of France, who became king in 1574. If Henry III died without surviving sons (and he was a homosexual who never had children), Henry IV (who was thoroughly and spectacularly heterosexual) was the next in line to the throne. 
This would not ordinarily have made much of a stir except that France had been involved in a religious civil war for a dozen years, one in which a sizable and militant Protestant minority was stanchly withstanding the Catholic majority. As it happened, Henry of Navarre was a Protestant and, in view of his position as prospective heir to the throne, the leader of the Protestant faction. There were many Frenchmen, on the other hand, determined that no Protestant should ever be King of France, regardless of his descent. 
This standoff was the situation when Love's Labor's Lost was written. England, as it happened, had just defeated the Spanish Armada in 1588, and had heroically foiled a vast Spanish-Catholic attempt to subvert the Protestant character of the island kingdom. England was consequently all on fire with the picture of itself as the Protestant David hacking down the great Catholic Goliath of Spain. Since Spain was the chief support of the French Catholics against the possible succession of Henry of Navarre, there was much warmth and admiration for Henry in England. 
It would be natural, then, for Shakespeare to write a play in which the King of Navarre was a hero and in which he was presented in the most favorable light. In order to make the situation not too pointed and topical, it was inadvisable to use the name "Henry," so he used "Ferdinand" instead. This was a favorite name during the Italian Renaissance and might have been inspired by the fact that Ferdinand II of Spain had taken over southern Navarre. 
In early 1589 Henry III of France was assassinated by a fanatic monk who felt the King wasn't Catholic enough, and Henry of Navarre succeeded to the throne as Henry IV of France. Unfortunately for the new king, the title he gained was not accepted by the Catholic party and he remained king only over his own minority. The Catholics controlled much of France, including the all-important city of Paris, and the civil war grew fiercer. Henry IV was a good general and won important victories, but against the sheer weight of Catholic intransigence he could not prevail. 
In 1591 the Earl of Essex, the great friend of Southampton and Shakespeare, even led an army in support of Henry of Navarre, but Essex was a poor soldier and failed in this, as in all his military efforts (see page II-508). 
Finally, in 1593, Henry of Navarre, with a sigh and a shrug, agreed to turn Catholic. Then, and only then, did Paris accept him. Henry entered the capital, was hailed as king, was eventually crowned, and became Henry IV in truth. ("Paris is worth a mass," said Henry.) 
Of course, this made him a traitor to the Protestant cause and Englishmen must have reflected sardonically over the proverbial (to them) faithlessness of the French nature. It is doubtful if Love's Labor's Lost could possibly have been written in its present form after 1593, for that reason. 


Ö Berowne, Dumaine, and Longaville




No action in the play has any but the very faintest and most distant association with the real Henry of Navarre, of course, but Shakespeare continues to use reality as the source of inspiration for names at least. 
Thus, the King turns to the three with him and says: 


You three, Berowne, Dumaine, and Longaville,

Have sworn for three years' term to live with me,

My fellow scholars Ö





óAct I, scene i, lines 15-17 


The name Berowne may have been inspired by Armand de Gontaut, Baron de Biron, who was a close associate of Henry of Navarre and who in 1589 gained the leadership of his armies. He won victories for Henry and was killed in battle in 1592. 
Biron had been closely associated with the expeditionary force led by Essex. This made Biron specially popular in England and it is not surprising that Shakespeare makes Berowne the most attractive person in the play. 
Longaville is a version of Longueville and there was a Due de Longueville also among Henry's generals. 
Dumaine is not so easy to place. That name may have been inspired by Charles, Duc de Mayenne, who was associated with Henry IV, but not as a friend. Mayenne was the leader of the Catholic opposition to Henry. To be sure, after Henry's conversion Mayenne was reconciled to the King and from 1596 on remained completely loyal to him. This, however, certainly took place well after the play was written. 


The French king's daughter. ..




Berowne is the one companion who doesn't think the King's plan will work. He doubts that they can successfully make themselves strict and austere philosophers for three years. He particularly doubts they can really forswear female company, as the King plans to have them do. In fact, that would be impossible, for Berowne says: 


This article, my liege, yourself must break;

For well you know here comes in embassy

The French king's daughter with yourself to speak,

A maid of grace and complete majesty,





óAct I, scene i, lines 132-35 


This too has a glancing resemblance to the real-life career of Henry of Navarre. In 1572 young Henry (only nineteen at the time) was married to Marguerite de Valois (also nineteen). At that time Henry III's older brother, Charles IX, was still on the throne (he didn't die till 1574) and Marguerite was sister to both of them. All three of them, Henry III, Charles LX, and Marguerite (plus an earlier short-lived monarch, Francis II), were children of King Henry II of France, who had died in 1559. 
The continuing religious civil war made the marriage no idyll, but in 1578 there was a well-publicized visit of Marguerite (along with her mother, Catherine de' Medici) to the court of Navarre. It may well have been this visit which was in Shakespeare's mind. 
If the visit was intended to improve the state of the marriage, by the way, it failed miserably. Henry was interested in many ladies and Marguerite bore him no children. Finally, in 1599, their marriage was annulled and Henry was able to marry again and beget an heir to the throne. This, however, was well after Love's Labor's Lost was written. 


Ö surrender up of Aquitaine

And why was the French princess coming? Berowne says that the embassy is

About surrender up of Aquitaine

To her decrepit, sick, and bed-rid father.





óAct I, scene i, lines 136-37 


The matter of Aquitaine is pure invention, of course. Even at its most powerful, Navarre never controlled that large section of southern France called Aquitaine (see page II-209). The name, however, would be a familiar one to Englishmen if only because Eleanor of Aquitaine was one of the most famous of English queens. 
The real Marguerite de Valois had no living father at the time of her marriage to Henry. She had been only six years old when her father died. However, the French royal family, at the time the play was written, seemed indeed decrepit, sick, and bed-rid. In 1588 Henry III of France had reigned fourteen years and though only thirty-seven was prematurely aged, and exhausted by the crises of the time and his personal excesses. Two older brothers had reigned briefly and died, one at sixteen and one at twenty-four. A younger brother was already dead at thirty, and none of the brothers left descendants. 


Ö Armado hight




It seems that the Princess must be greeted and entertained despite all ascetic arrangements. The cynical Berowne, delighted, inquires if there is any other and more reliable entertainment allowed the scholars than the occasional visit of a princess. 
The King informs him that there is an eccentric and euphuistic Spaniard at the court who can be very entertaining, albeit unconsciously so. He refers to him as: 


This child of fancy, that Armado hight [is named],





óAct I, scene i, line 169 


If the play were written in the aftermath of the great defeat of the Spanish fleet in 1588, a Spaniard would be a natural butt for the play, and his name, Armado (Don Adriano de Armado in full, according to the cast of characters), is a none too subtle recall of the defeated Armada. 
There has been a tendency for some people to find satirical representations in all the characters of this play. If it were written for a small "in group" rather than for the general public, it might well contain "in jokes" against the personal enemies of the group in the audience. 
Thus, the Earl of Essex had become Queen Elizabeth's favorite in the very years of the Armada (and this play) after her previous favorite, the Earl of Leicester, died. Essex's great rival was Sir Walter Raleigh, who had been Leicester's protege and whose nose had been put out of joint by the handsome Essex's greater success with the Queen. Some people therefore think that Armado was intended as a satire on Raleigh for the amusement of the Essex coterie. However, there seems little one can point to in what Armado says or does that has "Raleigh" written on it. (There are other candidates for the role of real-life Armado too, but none are really convincing.) 


Boy, what signÖ




Armado at once enters the plot, indirectly, to lend humor to it. He has spied a country bumpkin, Costard, making love to a young country girl, Jaquenetta, in defiance of the published edict against association with womankind, and has reported the matter to the authorities. Costard is arrested by Constable Dull and is turned over to the custody of Armado. 
It turns out, of course, that Armado is himself in love with Jaquenetta, and he displays this in the approved manner of the puling stage lover. He uses his page as a sounding board for his melancholy and says: 


Boy, what sign is it when a man

of great spirit grows melan choly?





óAct I, scene ii, lines 1-2 


The page is of the smallest possible size and is named Moth (pronounced "mote" in Shakespeare's day with the obvious pun). It is his function to be witty in Shakespearean fashion, so he answers: 


A great sign, sir, that he will look sad.





óAct I, scene ii, line 3 


Some people have attempted to equate Moth with Thomas Nashe, a pamphleteer who was contemporary with Shakespeare and who engaged in battles of wits in polemical style with other controversialists. He was coarse, pretentious, and arrogant. 
By those who think this, Armado is equated with Gabriel Harvey, another controversialist of the time who was an opponent of Nashe's. The Armado-Moth quibbling might therefore be taken to represent, with satiric inadequacy, the Homeric polemics of Harvey and Nashe. 


Samson, master Ö




Armado pictures himself as a warlike hero unmanned for love and demands of Moth that he give him examples of great men in love: 


Ö and, sweet my child, let them be

men of good repute and carriage [bearing].





óAct I, scene ii, lines 68-69 


Moth had already named Hercules as an example, and rightly, for he was described in the numerous myths that clustered about his name to have lain with innumerable women. Once, according to legend, he lay with fifty women in one night, impregnated them all, and ended by having fifty sons-a feat far greater, really, than all his twelve usual labors put together. 
At the mention of "good repute and carriage," Moth adds, however: 


Samson, master-he was a man of good carriage,

great carriage, for he carried the town-gates on his back

like a porter, and he was in love.





óAct I, scene ii, lines 70-72 


The twist on the word "carriage," from carrying oneself to carrying external objects, refers to a time when Samson was visiting a harlot in Gaza. The Philistines, knowing the town gates were locked, waited for morning to deal with him, but Samson rose at midnight "and took the doors of the gate of the city, and the two posts, and went away with them, bar and all, and put them upon his shoulders, and carried them up to the top of an hill" (Judges 16:3) so that he got away when his enemies confidently thought he was trapped. At the time of this feat he was in love (if you can dignify the relation between himself and the woman by that word). 
Later on, Armado meets Jaquenetta, confesses his love to the unimpressed girl, and soliloquizes afterward on the great men of the past who had been in love. To Hercules and Samson, he adds one more, saying: 


Ö yet was Solomon so seduced,

and he had a very good wit.





óAct I, scene ii, lines 172-73 


The biblical writers felt that Solomon's numerous wives seduced him away from perfect love of God. "And he had seven hundred wives, princesses, and three hundred concubines: and his wives turned away his heart. For it came to pass, when Solomon was old, that his wives turned away his heart after other gods" (1 Kings 11:3-4). 


Ö the Duke Alencon'sÖ




The Princess arrives and she has with her, symmetrically enough, three ladies: Maria, Catherine, and Rosaline. 
The symmetry proves even neater when each of the ladies evinces an interest in one of the King's followers, each different lady with a different man. What's more, each has met her man before. With Maria it's Longaville, with Katherine it's Dumaine, and with Rosaline it's Berowne. Thus, Katherine says of Dumaine: 


I saw him at the Duke Alencon's once;

And much too little of that good I saw





óAct II, scene i, lines 61-62 


If we stick to the time of Henry of Navarre, there was a Duc d'Alencon who was well known to the English of the time. He was the fourth and youngest of the four sons of Henry II, and he had watched his three older brothers become kings of France, one after the other: Francis II, Charles IX, and Henry III. He died in 1584, while his brother Henry was reigning. 
Alencon was known to the English as a persistent wooer of Queen Elizabeth I, which was rather pathetic, for Alencon was quite worthless and Elizabeth (one of the most remarkable women in history) could not have endured him an hour. However, Elizabeth was incapable of a clear no at any tune, but had a genius for temporization, so that the poor simpleton pursued the golden prize uselessly from 1579 to 1582. 


Ö in Brabant once




When the King and his followers arrive to receive the ladies, the men are as intrigued by the women as vice versa, and, as luck would have it, each man is interested in the particular woman who is interested in him. 
It works out beautifully, for Berowne (the wittiest of the men) is at once involved with Rosaline (the wittiest of the women), and, eager to break the ice, he uses a device not unknown today, when he says to her: 


Did not I dance with you in Brabant once?





óAct II, scene i, line 114 


Brabant was a duchy located in what is now central Belgium. In the time of Shakespeare it was part of the Spanish dominion in what was then known as the Spanish Netherlands. 
As it turns out, the two had indeed danced together in Brabant, and there follows a typical Shakespearean game of wordplay. 


Ö Charles his father




There is some business to be done, of course-the matter of Aquitaine. The King of Navarre does not wish to return it to France until he is paid a sum that the King of France owes him for expenses incurred by Navarre's father. The Princess, however, claims payment has already been made and orders her male attendant, Boyet, to produce the receipts, saying:


Boyet, you can produce acquittances

For such a sum from special officers

Of Charles his father.





óAct II, scene i, lines 160-62 


The father of the real Henry of Navarre was not named Charles. His name was Anthony, Duc de Vendome. 
On the other hand, Henry of Navarre had an uncle, the younger brother of his father, who was a Charles. He was Charles de Bourbon and was a cardinal. He was a Catholic, of course, and the next in line for the throne after Henry of Navarre, if the latter died without surviving sons. Indeed, when Henry III was assassinated in 1589 and Henry of Navarre declared himself the new king as Henry IV, the intransigent Catholics proclaimed Charles instead and called him Charles X. However, Charles was already in his middle sixties and he died in 1590. 
There were other Charleses too in the Bourbon ancestry. The most famous Bourbon of all, prior to Henry of Navarre himself, was Charles, Duc de Bourbon and Constable of France. He was made Constable (that is, commander of the armies) in 1515 under King Francis I, but achieved his greatest fame by quarreling with the King and defecting to the national enemy, the Emperor Charles V (see page II-747) in 1523. The Constable died, while still fighting against his King, in 1527, sixty years before his distant cousin, Henry of Navarre, succeeded to the throne. 


Ö Dan Cupid




The receipts the Princess speaks of are not actually on hand. They are on the way, however, and must be waited for. 
This means that business can be temporarily forgotten and the gentlemen and ladies can continue their business of pairing off and indulging in their wit duels. Berowne is particularly chagrined at finding himself in love and at being beaten by: 


This senior-junior, giant-dwarf, Dan Cupid,





óAct III, scene i, line 182 


The term "Dan Cupid" does not signify that Cupid's first name was conceived to be Daniel. Rather, it means "Lord Cupid." The Latin word for "Lord" is Domitius. This is shortened to "Don" by the Spaniards and, in turn, distorted to "Dan" by the English. 
In his disgust, Berowne inveighs against women and tries, but fails, to dismiss them with hard words. He even scouts their morality, saying: 


Ö by heaven, one that will do the deed,

Though Argus were her eunuch and her guard!





óAct III, scene i, lines 200-1 


The reference is to Argus Panoptes ("all eyes"), who had a hundred eyes set all over his body. At any given moment only fifty of them slept, so that there were always fifty awake. Juno set Argus to watching Io, the illicit love of her straying husband, Jupiter. 
The only way Jupiter could rescue Io (in heifer's disguise at the time) was to send Mercury to tell Argus a droning tale that put all hundred eyes to sleep at once. Mercury then killed him and all Juno could do was save the hundred eyes and put them in the tail of the peacock, a bird sacred to her. 


Ö king Cophetua..,




Berowne, despite his brave words, finds that love drives him to write a letter to Rosaline (strictly against the King's rules) and to have it delivered to her secretly by Costard the clown. Armado, however, is also using Costard as delivery boy, sending a letter by way of the clown to Jaquenetta. 
When Costard tries to deliver the letter to Rosaline, the Princess seizes it and behold, it turns out to be Armado's letter. She opens it and finds that the Spaniard is writing most grandiloquently to the peasant girl. He makes comparisons that are flattering to himself, if little likely to delight the girl, for he says: 


The magnanimous and most illustrate

king Cophetua set eye upon the pernicious

and indubitate beggar Zenelophon,





óAct IV, scene i, lines 65-68 


King Cophetua, the hero of a ballad, was a completely fictional personage. He was an immensely rich king of Africa who disdained all womankind till he accidentally saw a beggar maid from his window. He had to have her, married her, and lived with her long and happily. The name given the beggar maid may have been Penelope to begin with. It varies from version to version of the story, however, and Zenelophon is a name as good as another. 
As evidence for the very popular thesis that "love conquers all," the ballad grew famous and was particularly close to the hearts of any girl that dreamed of marrying above her station someday. 
It is impossible to help but notice now and then that Armado is extraordinarily like Don Quixote in his consistent overestimate of himself and in Ms insistence on imagining himself a superhuman storybook hero. He ends the letter with some doggerel which begins: 


Thus dost thou hear the Nemean lion roar

'Gainst thee, thou lamb Ö





óAct IV, scene i, lines 90-91 


Armado represents himself as the Nemean lion (see page I-58) while Jaquenetta is the lamb. (And remember that Don Quixote tried to fight a lion in the cage and called himself, in consequence, "Knight of the Lions.") 
There is something rather pleasant in the thought that Shakespeare might be borrowing from Miguel de Cervantes, the Spanish author of the Don Quixote saga, since Cervantes was almost an exact contemporary of Shakespeare's (the former was three years younger and both died in the same year) and by all odds one of the few writers, on the basis of Don Quixote alone, worthy of being mentioned in the same breath with Shakespeare. 
There is only one catch, but that is a fatal one. The first part of Don Quixote was published in 1605, a dozen years at least after Love's Labor's Lost was written. 
When the Princess wonders about the identity of the man who wrote the unintentionally amusing letter, Boyet tells her he is: 


A phantasime, a Monarcho, and one that makes sport

To the prince and his book-mates.





óAct IV, scene i, lines 101-2 


A "phantasime" is a man with a wild imagination (fantasy), and Monarcho was a harmless Italian madman who was tolerated at Elizabeth's court because he was found to be amusing, and who had died perhaps ten years before the play was written. 
One can't help remembering that in the second part of Don Quixote, published in 1615, there is a long section in which the mad knight is humored by a kindly Duke and Duchess who keep him at their estate for the fun he affords them. 
Could it be in reverse? Could Cervantes have come across Love's Labor's Lost and turned a small suggestion into a towering work of genius? I have never seen this stated even as a conjecture but I can't help wondering. 


Ö King Pepin of France Ö




Boyet playfully rallies Rosaline on the letter Berowne has sent her, a letter she hasn't seen yet because of Costard's mix-up. She counters with: 


Shall I come upon thee

with an old saying that was a man when

King Pepin of France was a little boyÖ





óAct IV, scene i, lines 121-23 


King Pepin (see page I-455) reigned in France in the eighth century, over eight hundred years before Shakespeare's time, and he was apparently considered the epitome of the dead-and-gone in French idiom. 


Dictynna Ö




The next scene introduces Holofernes, a most unbearable pedant, whose speech consists half of Latin and who spends all his time nit-picking the English language. He is a satire on what learning can come to if it is carried to extremes without even a modicum of good sense to go along with all the education. 
Those who look for personal satire in Love's Labor's Lost suspect Holofernes to represent a gibe against John Florio, the London-born son of a Protestant refugee from Italy. Florio was a linguist who spent his life translating foreign works into English, notably Montaigne's Essays, and who compiled Italian-English dictionaries, collections of proverbs, grammars, etc. He was intensely learned and was probably pedantic enough to make it seem that Holofernes was a satiric reference to him. 
Another possibility is Thomas Harriot, an English mathematician who was Raleigh's scientific adviser on an expedition to the New World (a position which would be alone sufficient to make him instant anathema to the Essex coterie, including Shakespeare). Harriot wrote a book on the voyage which was published in 1588 and which was pedantic enough, perhaps, to inspire the satire. 
Holofernes is a pedant from his very name onward, for the name, though biblical, is not one that many would think of using. It occurs only in the apocryphal (but very popular) Book of Judith, accepted as canonical by the Catholics but by neither Jews nor Protestants. It deals with an invasion of Judea by an army of Assyrians under a general named Holofernes. The general was hoodwinked and assassinated by the Jewish heroine Judith, and as a villainous name it would scarcely be used except to signify someone who would find pleasure in obscure and unusual allusions. 
Thus, Constable Dull tries to trap Holofernes with a riddle which he thinks is impossible to puzzle out-to wit, what was a month old when Cain was born, is still alive, but is not yet five weeks old. The answer is, of course, "the moon," since when it is four weeks old it starts all over again with another "new moon." 
Holofernes knows the answer and gives it at once, but naturally would not dream of saying "the moon" or even using the more common classical terms such as "Diana," "Selene," "Artemis," or "Cynthia." Instead, he picks the most obscure allusion possible and says: 


Dictynna, good man Dull.





óAct IV, scene ii, line 37 


Dictynna was undoubtedly one of the many local names for the moon goddess which then had to be woven into the general body of myths worked out by the old Greek poets. It was said that one of the companions of Diana, the goddess of the hunt, who was often considered a personification of the moon, was Britomartis, who hid from the unwanted love of King Minos of Crete. Britomartis finally threw herself into the sea in desperation and was rescued in a fisherman's net. Thereafter, she was given the name "Dictynna" from a Greek word for "net." Her association with Diana was used to explain the fact that Dictynna could be used as a personification of the moon. 
Of course, Dull can make nothing of the answer and Holofernes has to explain it. 
Again, he quotes a Latin line and falls into ecstasies over it, saying: 


Ah, good old Mantuan





óAct IV, scene ii, lines 95-96 


Now, the greatest of all the Latin poets, Vergil, who wrote the Aeneid, was born near Mantua and was frequently referred to as "the Mantuan." A reader might be forgiven if he supposed at first that Holofernes was quoting from the Aeneid and rhapsodizing over Vergil. 
He is not, however. He is referring to Battista Spagnoli, an obscure Italian Renaissance poet, who used "Mantuan" as his pen name. 


Ovidius Naso.. .




Jaquenetta brings Holofernes a poem delivered her by Costard and supposedly intended for her. It is the letter, however, written by Berowne in the form of an eloquent sonnet and intended for Rosaline. Jaquenetta can make nothing of its high-flown style. 
Nathaniel the Curate, a humble admirer of Holofernes, is also present, and he reads it. Holofernes criticizes the reading at once, of course, and falls into admiration of the Roman poet Ovid (see page I-8). Quite irrelevantly, he makes use of the poet's name to make a ridiculous metaphor, saying: 


Ovidius Naso was the man;

and why indeed "Naso" but for smelling out

odoriferous flowers of fancyÖ





óAct IV, scene ii, lines 125-27 


"Naso," you see comes from nasus, the Latin word for "nose." 


Ö as mad as AjaxÖ




In another part of the park, Berowne is still trying to write love poetry and still berating himself for it, saying: 


By the Lord, this love is as mad as Ajax:

it kills sheep; it kills me-I a sheep.





óAct IV, scene iii, lines 6-7 


This refers to the tragic death of Ajax in madness and frustration, killing sheep under the hallucinatory belief they are his enemies (see page I-110). 


Ö critic Timon .,.




He hears someone coming and hides. It is the King, who reads aloud a lovesick sonnet to the Princess, then hides as Longaville comes in to read aloud a lovesick sonnet to Maria, then hides as Dumaine comes in to read aloud a lovesick sonnet to Katherine. 
Each one is in love against their original intention and each moves in a simultaneous and symmetrical way. Each one in turn steps forward to announce his discovery of the next and then Berowne steps forward to berate them all in most hypocritical fashion considering his own activity. He affects to bemoan the conversion of serious scholars into moaning lovers and says: 


O me, with what strict patience have I sat,

To see a king transformed to a gnat!

To see great Hercules whipping a gig [top],

And profound Solomon to tune a jig,

And Nestor play at push-pin with the boys,

And critic Timon laugh at idle toys!





óAct IV, scene iii, lines 164-69 


The contrasts he cites are extreme ones. He pictures Hercules, the epitome of strength and heroism, and Solomon and Nestor, bywords for wisdom in Greek and Hebrew literature, respectively, engage in childish occupations. (This is like serious Navarrese scholars writing love poems.) As for "critic Timon," this is Timon the misanthrope concerning whom Shakespeare was to try to write a play, Timon of Athens (see page I-133) fifteen years later. 


Ö the school of night




But, of course, in the midst of Berowne's self-righteous scoldings, in come Jaquenetta and Costard with Berowne's letter, which they still don't understand. Berowne, to his chagrin and embarrassment, must admit that he too has been writing sonnets. 
The others are very naturally quite anxious to turn the tables and they make unsparing (and, by our standards, unchivalrous) fun of Rosaline, who is Berowne's love. Rosaline is a brunet at a time when it was conventional to consider blondness beauty. 
The King sneers at Rosaline's blackness (meaning her hair, of course, and not her skin). Loyally, Berowne insists that he considers blackness a sign of beauty, but the King says: 


O paradox! Black is the badge of hell,

The hue of dungeons, and the school of night;





óAct IV, scene iii, lines 253-54 


The phrase "school of night" is a puzzler. Some people think it is a misprint and that what is meant is that black is the "shade" of night. 
On the other hand, some think "school" is what is really meant and that this is another of Shakespeare's partisan references. This may have referred to a group of amateur scholars who gathered together in a secret group to study the new astronomy that had arisen out of Copernicus' book in 1543, which held that the Earth moved round the sun and not vice versa. 
Shakespeare never accepted this and, in fact, his view of science is always strictly conservative and medieval. The Copernican view was widely held to be against the Bible and religion, and therefore atheistic. The group of scholars would be, then, according to their enemies, a "school of night"; that is, one where devilish doctrines were taught. 
Raleigh was supposed to patronize this wicked school, which, of course, gave the Essex faction a handle with which to strike at him. 


Ö the true Promethean fireBerowne

survives the teasing and launches

into a long and eloquent defense of love.






Once again, he blames the King and the others for even trying to abolish love so that they might study undisturbed. Constant study will wither, while love will supply true inspiration. He says: 


From women's eyes this doctrine I derive:

They are the ground, the books, the academes,

From whence doth spring the true Promethean fire.





óAct IV, scene iii, lines 301-3 


The phrase "Promethean fire" harks back to Prometheus (the name means "forethought"), who was considered, in the Greek myths, to be one of the Titans, the race of divine beings who ruled the universe before Zeus and his relatives (the Olympians) won that rule by force. 
In the war between the Titans and the Olympians, Prometheus foresaw that the latter would win and he was careful to avoid joining the other Titans or to do anything that would offend Zeus. He was therefore allowed to retain his freedom when the other Titans were condemned to Tartarus. 
Nevertheless, Prometheus was still a Titan and he could not wholeheartedly be a friend of the Olympians. Recently created mankind did not have the secret of fire-which was deliberately withheld by Zeus. Prometheus therefore stole fire from the sun and brought it down to man. 
Zeus punished Prometheus for this by chaining him to a crag in the Caucasus where an eagle (or a vulture) gnawed at his liver all day long. The liver regenerated at night so as to be ready for fresh torture the next day. 
It is possible to consider Prometheus the embodiment of man's forethought or ingenuity-personified "inventiveness." The fire he brought man might be, symbolically, the light of insight and inspiration and that is what Berowne would mean by "the true Promethean fire." 
Berowne's defense of love is in the tradition of courtly love that was developed in southern France in the mid-twelfth century and was associated with the troubadours. Eleanor of Aquitaine (see page II-209) was one of the first great patrons of such notions. 
Courtly love had little to do with real passion or with sex but rather presented love as a kind of game to amuse an idle aristocracy, a game which consisted of complex rules of behavior, of love poetry, of exchanges of wit, of idealization of women-of everything but actual contact. 
So Berowne speaks in grandiloquent phrases of love as an act of heroic aspiring to idealized woman, saying: 


For valor, is not Love a Hercules,

Still climbing trees in the Hesperides?

Subtle as Sphinx;





óAct IV, scene iii, lines 339-41


For his eleventh labor, Hercules had to obtain golden apples from the garden of the Hesperides. The Hesperides were three nymphs who were descendants of Hesperus, the evening star. The name is from the Greek word for "west," since the evening star is always visible in the west after sunset. The Hesperides are thus the individuals to whom the garden belongs, but Shakespeare takes it to be a region in which the garden is located. Of course, Hercules must climb the tree if he is to get the apples, and the valor consists of doing so despite the fact that it is guarded by a fearsome dragon. 
The Sphinx, in Greek mythology, was a monster with the body of a lion and the head of a woman. It was most notable for propounding riddles (hence it was "subtle"), which it forced those it met to answer. It killed those who could not answer correctly. Oedipus, on his way to Thebes, was faced with the riddle "What has sometimes two feet, sometimes three, sometimes four, and is weakest when it has most?" Oedipus at once answered, "Man, for he crawls on all fours as a baby, walks on two feet in youth, and needs a cane in old age." The Sphinx, in chagrin, killed herself. 
Love's Labor's Lost is Shakespeare's tribute, then, to courtly love, and this speech is the clearest expression of it. 
Berowne is convincing. The men decide to lay aside subterfuge, forget their resolutions, and woo the women. 


PriscianÖ




Meanwhile Nathaniel the Curate and Holofernes the Pedant are discussing Armado. Holofernes finds fault with Armado, particularly in his fantastic manner of speech (as though Holofernes himself were not infinitely worse). Nathaniel drinks in the other's every word (writing down particularly good ones in his notebook). Nathaniel even tries a little Latin of his own, which Holofernes immediately corrects, saying: 


Priscian a little scratched.





óAct V, scene i, lines 31-32 


Priscian is the usual English name for Priscianus Caesariensis, a Latin grammarian at Constantinople about a.d. 500. His book on Latin grammar was the final authority through the Middle Ages, and it was common to say "to break Priscian's head" in characterizing any mistake in Latin. In this case the mistake is so minor (a single letter) that Holofernes is satisfied to say that Priscian was merely scratched. 


Ö honorificabilitudinitatibus




Armado, Moth, and Costard come onstage. Holofernes and the Spaniard are immediately involved in complicated badinage and Moth comments ironically at their ability to use long words and involved phrases. Costard, with equal irony, wonders why Armado, who is so familiar with long words, doesn't swallow the diminutive Moth. He says: 


/ marvel thy master hath not eaten

thee for a word; for thou art not so long

by the head as honorificabilitudinitatibus.




óAct V, scene i, lines 42-44 


This is the longest word in Shakespeare but it is not really used as a word, merely given as an example of a long word. It is Latin, of course, and is the ablative plural of a word meaning "honorableness." It has twenty-seven letters and is thought to be the longest word in Latin and, therefore, the longest word in English-at least in Shakespeare's. time. Nowadays, it is "antidisestablishmentarianism" which is usually cited as longest, with twenty-eight letters. (It means the doctrine of opposition to the disestablishment of the Anglican Church and came into prominence in the nineteenth century.) 
Actually, it is only those whose knowledge is limited to what are called the humanities who fall for this hoary old chestnut. In German, it is customary to run words together to make long compound words far longer than any in ordinary Latin or English. Since organic chemistry was almost entirely a German monopoly in the nineteenth century, the habit has persisted in naming organic chemicals, even in English. The intricate structure of organic chemicals requires an intricate naming system and there is, for instance, a chemical called "betadimethylaminobenzaldehyde," which is twenty-nine letters long and which is far from the longest possible. 


Ö the Nine Worthies




Apparently the King is planning an entertainment that evening for the Princess. He has consulted Armado on what it should consist of and he, in turn, consults Holofernes. Holofernes makes an instant decision: 


Sir, you shall present beforeher

the Nine Worthies.





óAct V, scene i, lines 118-19 


The Nine Worthies (see page II-401) are usually given as Hector, Alexander, Julius Caesar, Joshua, David, Judas Maccabeus, Arthur, Charlemagne, and Godfrey Bouillon.
Holofernes does not go by this standard list, apparently. He starts assigning the different worthies to the people present and after mentioning Joshua and Judas Maccabeus, he says: 


Ö this swain,

because of his great limb or joint,

shall pass Pompey the GreatÖ




óAct V, scene i, lines 128-30 


We can only suppose that Pompey the Great is substituted for Julius Caesar, and if this is so, it is a great mistake, for Caesar was far the greater man (see page I-257). 


Saint Denis. ..




The last scene in Love's Labor's Lost is the longest in the play and, for that matter, in Shakespeare. It begins with the ladies coming together to talk about the fact that they have all received love tokens from the men. Boyet arrives to say he has overheard the men speaking and they have decided to woo the ladies in earnest. 
The Princess says, lightly: 


Saint Denis to Saint Cupid!




óAct V, scene ii, line 87 


It is to be a merry war between the sexes in the tradition of courtly love. The men come to woo and the French ladies will resist. Saint Denis, the patron saint of France (see page II-515), will be opposed to the assaults of love, here represented as Saint Cupid. 


Like Muscovites or Russians Ö




Boyet tells the ladies that the gentlemen will come to them in exotic costume, for they 


Ö are apparelled thus-

Like Muscovites or RussiansÖ




óAct V, scene ii, lines 120-21 


In Shakespeare's time, Russians were exotic and popular in England because of Chancellor's voyage (see page I-640). 
The ladies therefore decide to wear masks and to switch their characteristic ribboned decorations ("favors") with one another, so that each man might think the wrong girl his and court at cross-purposes. This is done and the ladies utterly thwart the men first when they are disguised as Russians and then in their own persons. 
Berowne in particular is forced, in frustration, to forswear the complexities of courtly love, at which the ladies win every time, and vows to be an honest lover henceforward. He says: 


Henceforth my wooing mind

shall be expressed

In russet yeas and honest kersey noes.




óAct V, scene ii, lines 413-16 


Russet and kersey are the color and material of homemade peasant clothing and Shakespeare thus expresses (as he usually does in his plays) his opinion of the superiority of plain Englishness over foreign ways and customs. 


Whose club killed CerberusÖ




But it is time now for the masque of the Nine Worthies to be presented by the various eccentrics of the play. 
Costard comes in with a sonorous Pompey the Great. Nathaniel is a hesitant and easily rattled Alexander the Great, and then in come Holofernes and Moth as Judas Maccabeus and Hercules respectively. Holofernes speaks first for Moth with the expected scraps of Latin, saying: 


Great Hercules is presented by this imp

Whose club killed Cerberus, that three-headed canus;

And when he was a babe, a child, a shrimp,

Thus did he strangle serpents in his manus.




óAct V, scene ii, lines 586-89 


The trite Latin rhyme of canus (dog) and manus (hand) reduces pedantry to its most foolish. 
Hercules' twelfth and climactic labor was that of bringing into the upper world the three-headed hound Cerberus (see page I-101), who guarded the entrance to the underworld. He did not kill it, but brought it up alive as proof of the successful completion of the labor, then returned it. 
When Hercules was a year old, according to legend, the jealous Juno (who was angry because Hercules was the offspring of one of Jupiter's many extramarital ventures) sent two serpents to kill him in the cradle. The infant Hercules seized each serpent in one of his baby fists and strangled it. The diminutive page is therefore not so ridiculous a representation of Hercules as might be thought. He represents Hercules, the Heroic Babe. 


DeadÖ




The rest of the masque of the Nine Worthies is reduced to a shambles. Holofernes, trying to make the Judas Maccabeus speech for himself, is teased into silence. Armado, who comes next as Hector, can make no more headway. 
Costard is urged on by Berowne to accuse Armado of making Jaquenetta pregnant, and for a minute the audience is made to think there will be a mock duel between the two, but all is interrupted by the arrival of a messenger. He comes with news of the Princess' father, the King of France. The Princess guesses at once: 


Dead, for my life!




óAct V, scene ii, line 721 


Henry III was stabbed on August 1, 1589, and died the next day. This may have nothing to do with the play at all, for there is a good chance it was written before then. 
The French King's death, in the play, is a convenient device to end the developing and increasingly intense game of courtly love before it is forced to graduate into something else. The unreal world of the Navarrese court is forced to face reality, for the Princess must return to Paris to face the difficulties of a succession. 
The men insist that though the game is over, their love is real. The ladies order them to remain austere, as they had originally planned to do, for one year anyway and if, at the end, they are still in love, that love will be returned. 
And so love's labor is lost-for a year. Yet the audience may suppose that the year will pass and that love will then win. 








15. The Taming Of The Shrew


The taming of the shrew, written, possibly, in 1593 or 1594, is a play within a play. At least it starts out so with what Shakespeare calls an "Induction" ("Introduction") representing the frame within which the play proper is presented. 


Ö Richard Conqueror




The Induction begins with Christopher Sly, more than half drunk, being thrown out of an alehouse by an irate landlady who demands money for the glasses he has broken; money he refuses to pay. 
With the owlish gravity of drunkenness, he rejects the names she calls him. He says: 


Ö the Slys are no rogues.

Look in the chronicles: we came in with Richard Conqueror.





óInduction, scene i, lines 3-4 


Christopher Sly is, as he says later, a tinker, a profession lost to the modern world. A tinker was a solderer and repairer of kettles, pots, and other such household metalware, the name of the profession coming from the tink-tink of a small hammer against the utensil. 
It did not take much capital or much intelligence to be a tinker, and while tinkers acted as though they were general handy men, they usually couldn't go much beyond solder or a nail, so that we now have the verb "to tinker," meaning "to fiddle with, rather unskillfully." 
Tinkers could scarcely make a living if they sat in one place and waited for neighbors' kettles to come apart. They were usually itinerant, carrying their few tools on their backs and going from village to village. They were distrusted, as strangers usually are, and perhaps a number of them used the tinker's equipment only as a blind and were really beggars, or even smalltime thieves and con men. At any rate, tinkers were traditionally considered rascals and rogues. 
Christopher Sly, then, being a tinker, and showing himself in costume and action to be an utter no-account, is amusing in claiming to be descended from one of the Norman barons who conquered England in the eleventh century. 
What's more, Sly's amalgamation of William the Conqueror and Richard the Lion-Hearted (the latter was the great-great-grandson of the former) helps the humor with the audience. Even the least sophisticated of the Elizabethans would surely catch the error. 


Ö for Semiramis




Christopher Sly falls into a drunken slumber, just as a Lord and his hunt-tag party come on the scene. Finding Sly, it occurs to the Lord to play an elaborate practical joke. They are to take Sly, dress him in fine clothes, and, when he wakes, convince him that he is a great nobleman who for many years has been mad and thought himself a pauper. 
This is done, and in the second scene of the Induction, Sly, awakening with a call for small beer, finds himself attended by a variety of obsequious servants who wait on him with the greatest tenderness and with a wealth of classical allusions. The Lord himself plays a role as servant and says respectfully: 


Ö wilt thou sleep? We'll have thee to a couch

Softer and sweeter than the lustful bed

On purpose trimmed up for Semiramis.





óInduction, scene ii, lines 37-39 


Semiramis is the legendary Queen of Assyria who had become a byword, among the Greeks, for luxury (see page I-403). 


Adonis paintedÖ




Among other things, they offer Sly a choice of paintings dealing with mythological subjects. Thus, one servant says: 


Ö We will fetch thee straight

Adonis painted by a running brook

And Cytherea all in sedges hid,





óInduction, scene ii, lines 49-51 


This refers to the myth of Venus and Adonis, concerning which Shakespeare had written a long poem a year or two before he wrote this play (see page I-5).
Cytherea is an alternate name for Venus, derived from the fact that an important seat of her worship was the island of Cythera, just off the southeastern corner of Greece. 


We'll show thee Io. ..




The Lord offers a second choice: 


We'll show thee Io as she was a maid

And how she was beguiled and surprised.





óInduction, scene ii, lines 54-55 


Io was a daughter of the river god Inachus in the Greek myths, and Jupiter fell in love with her. The myth has nothing to say about how Io was "beguiled and surprised," though Jupiter used guile on other young ladies, notably Europa (see page I-44). The myth concentrates instead on the manner in which Jupiter's jealous wife, Juno, persecuted Io afterward (see page I-86). 


Ö Daphne roaming. ..




A third choice is presented: 


Or Daphne roaming through a thorny wood,

Scratching her legs that one shall swear she bleeds,

And at that sight shall sad Apollo weep,





óInduction, scene ii, lines 57-59 


Daphne was a nymph sworn to virginity whom Apollo loved. She rejected his advances and fled from him when he tried to seize her. He pursued and would have caught her, but at the last minute, her mother, Gaea (the earth goddess), turned her into a laurel tree. 
Little by little, then, Sly is convinced that after all he is a lord. He even begins to speak in blank verse instead of the usual prose. And to cap the climax, a play is presented for his edification, and it is this play which is what we usually think of as The Taming of the Shrew. 


Ö fair PaduaÖ




The play within a play opens with two young men, Lucentio and his servant Tranio, entering. Lucentio summarizes the situation:


Tranio, since for the great desire 1 had

To see fair Padua, nursery of arts,

I am arrived for fruitful Lombardy,





óAct I, scene i, lines 1-3 


Padua is a city in northeastern Italy a little over twenty miles west of Venice and noted for its university. 
Medieval Italy was, in fact, famous for its universities, for learning had taken new root there while it was still all but dead in the countries beyond the Alps. The first medieval university was established in Bologna, eighty miles southwest of Venice, in 1088. It specialized in the study of Roman law and remained the great center of legal studies for centuries afterward. 
Bologna had its quarrels and problems and, on occasion, its schisms. In 1222 a group of its professors and students broke away and established a competing university at Padua, and it was this which made that city the "nursery of arts." It, as well as Bologna, supported a great law school and the two were great rivals. 
Padua was an independent city-state through the Middle Ages but in 1405 it was absorbed into the territory of the Venetian republic and was still part of it in Shakespeare's time (and remained so till 1797). Padua was not actually part of Lombardy in the medieval or modern sense. Lombardy is located in northwestern Italy with Milan as its chief city, and even at its closest approach, Lombardy is fifty miles west of Padua. 
This, however, is not as bad as it sounds. In the eighth century all of northern Italy was under the control of the Lombards and the term might therefore be used in a poetic sense for northern Italy generally. (Nevertheless, Shakespeare may well have been a little hazy on the fine points of Italian geography. This shows up more clearly elsewhere.) 


PisaÖ




Lucentio has come to Padua for an education, but he pauses also to announce his birthplace: 


Pisa, renowned for grave citizens,

Gave me my beingÖ





óAct I, scene i, lines 10-11 


Pisa is located on the western coast of Italy, about 140 miles southwest of Padua. During the Middle Ages it was for a time a great commercial city, the rival of Genoa and Venice. It was at its height between 1050 and 1250, and in 1173 it built what is now its leading feature, a bell tower that, through some flaw in its foundation, settled out of the vertical. It is the Leaning Tower of Pisa. 
Toward the end of the thirteenth century Pisa was defeated in a long war with Genoa and began a steady decline. In 1406 it was captured by the forces of the city of Florence, forty-five miles to its east, and remained under Florentine domination through Shakespeare's time (and, indeed, until 1860). In fact, Lucentio describes himself as: 


Vincentio's son, brought up in Florence,





óAct I, scene i, line 14 


Florence, the home city of Dante, was the very epitome of Renaissance culture. It was the Athens of Italy, and one would boast of being brought up there as one might boast of having been brought up in Athens in ancient times or in Paris in modern times. 


As Ovid Ö




Tranio is a little nervous at Lucentio's grandiloquent speech, for he views with some concern the prospect of a close course of study. He says: 


Let's be no stoics nor no stocks, I pray,

Or so devote to Aristotle's checks

As [to make] Ovid be an outcast quite abjured.





óAct I, scene i, lines 31-33 


Tranio's distaste for Stoics (see page I-305) or for Aristotle (see page I-104) is not so puzzling in a merry young man. 
As for Ovid, whom he prefers, his best-known work is his Metamorphoses (see page I-8). However, a more notorious piece of work was his Ars Amatoria (The Art of Love), which gave, in witty and amusing style, a course in seduction for young men. 
Ovid insisted it was intended to deal only with the relations of young men and women of easy virtue, but it could easily be applied to anyone, of course, and the Emperor Augustus, a very moral man, was outraged at its publication. It was one of the reasons why Ovid was banished to a far corner of the Empire a few years later. 
It is undoubtedly The Art of Love of which Tranio is thinking, and he is urging Lucentio not to be so wrapped up in his studies as to forget to have a little fun now and then.


Ö hear Minerva speak




Tranio need not have worried. Lucentio is, actually, all on the side of Ovid too, and something comes up at once to prove it. 
A rich merchant of Padua, Baptista, comes on the scene with his two daughters, Katherina (or, for short, Kate) and Bianca. Trailing him are two other men also, the aged Gremio and the younger Hortensio. 
Both Gremio and Hortensio are clamoring for the hand of Bianca, the younger daughter, a gentle girl, who stands with eyes cast down and rarely speaks. (Her very name means "white," as though to emphasize her color-lessness.) 
Baptista will have none of this, however. He will not allow Bianca to marry until the elder sister, Kate, is married. The two suitors can have their chance at her. If one marries her the other may woo Bianca. 
But it turns out at once that Kate is a furious shrew, whose every word is a threat, whose eyes flash fire, and who is ready at a moment's notice to commit mayhem. The two suitors climb over each other in an attempt to get away from her. 
Tranio and Lucentio are watching from the sidelines. Tranio is amazed at the shrewishness of Kate, but Lucentio has eyes only for the gentle Bianca. When Bianca humbly accepts her father's delay of her marriage, Lucentio is ravished with her modest words. He says to Tranio: 


Hark, Tranio, thou mayst hear Minerva speak.





óAct I, scene i, line 84 


Minerva was the Roman goddess of wisdom (her very name may be related to mens, meaning "mind") and is the analogue of the Greek Athena. 


Ö love-in-idleness




Baptista and his daughters go off, but not till after the father mentions in passing that he is looking for a music teacher for Bianca. 
Gremio and Hortensio look after them in chagrin and decide that the only way they can manage to pursue their suit of Bianca is to find some madman, somehow, who will be willing to marry Katherina. After all, Baptista is enormously rich, so that Katherina (considering her shrewishness and the difficulty of getting rid of her) would command a huge dowry. 
They leave too, and Lucentio comes out of his wide-eyed trance to find himself deeply in love at first sight with Bianca. He says to Tranio: 


But see, while idly I stood looking on,

I found the effect of love-in-idleness.





óAct I, scene i, lines 150-51 


Love-in-idleness is the pansy, which was thought in Elizabethan nature folklore to have the effect of a love potion (see page I-34). Lucentio decides to be utterly frank about his feelings and plans, for he says to Tranio:


Thou art to me as secret and as dear

As Anna to the Queen of Carthage was,





óAct I, scene i, lines 153-54 


Anna was the sister of Dido (see page I-20) and her confidante. Lucentio goes on to say: 


Ö / saw sweet beauty in her face,

Such as the daughter of Agenor had,

That made great Jove to humble him to her hand

When with his knees he kissed the Cretan strand.





óAct I, scene i, lines 166-70 


Agenor was a mythical king of Tyre and his daughter was Europa, for whose sake Zeus (Jupiter, or Jove) turned himself into a bull and with her swam to Crete (see page I-44). 
Love gives Lucentio an idea. He will impersonate a schoolmaster and get the post teaching Bianca. While he is doing this, his servant, Tranio, can pretend to be Lucentio, performing the educational and social tasks that the real Lucentio ought to be doing (and concerning which his father, Vincentio, back in Pisa, will expect to hear of now and then). 


Ö Would 'twere done




At the end of the first scene, attention is suddenly drawn to Christopher Sly, the tinker, sitting in the balcony. He is dreadfully bored, but doesn't like to say so. When the page, who is pretending to be his wife, asks how he likes it, he says: 


'Tis a very excellent piece of work, madam lady.

Would 'twere done!





óAct I, scene i, lines 252-53 


But Christopher Sly is done, for we hear no more of him ever. From this point on, the play within a play is the play itself, while Christopher Sly, the Lord who fools him, and all the play-acting servants vanish from the scene. 
It's possible that Shakespeare simply forgot about them. Shakespeare had, apparently, borrowed the device from an earlier anonymous play, The Taming of a Shrew ("a" rather than "the"), which used the play within a play technique. It may be, however, that Shakespeare got so interested in the play about the shrew that he grew impatient with the outer frame as merely serving to get in his way and dropped it. 
Why, then, did he not go back and cross out the Induction and these few lines at the end of the first scene? In this connection, we must take into account the legend that Shakespeare prided himself on never revising. 
Another possibility is that Shakespeare did keep the frame but that the later parts were omitted by accident from the particular copy that survived and was used as the basis for the first collection of his plays. 


Verona, for a while.. .




The second scene opens with the entrance of Petruchio, the hero of the play. He says: 


Verona, for a while I take my leave

To see my friends in Padua. ..





óAct I, scene ii, lines 1-2 


Verona is another city of northern Italy and is located some forty miles west of Padua. In Shakespeare's time, Verona, like Padua, was part of the Venetian republic. 


Ö Florentius" love




Petruchio is accompanied by his servant, Grumio, and together they are on the doorstep of Hortensio's house, Hortensio being one of the friends Petruchio has come to see. 
There is a contretemps at once, one designed to show that Petruchio is as great a shrew in his way as Katherina is in hers. He orders Grumio to knock at the gate, but Grumio takes him to mean to strike Petruchio himself, and refuses. There is a loud clamor, at which Hortensio opens the door. 
Petruchio and Hortensio embrace each other and the former explains that he has come to Padua to seek his fortune. Hortensio at once has the notion of suggesting that Petruchio marry Katherina but, remembering her shrewishness, hesitates to play so foul a trick on a friend. 
Petruchio, however, urges him on. He is after money and that is the only requirement he has. Aside from that:


Be she as foul as was Florentius' love,

As old as Sibyl, and as curst and shrewd

As Socrates' Xanthippe or a worse,

She moves me not Ö





óAct I, scene ii, lines 68-71 


Florentius is the name of a knight in Confessio Amantis by John Gower (see page I-181). The plot is one in which a knight is forced to marry a horrible old hag who has helped him in time of need and who requires the marriage as recompense. The reward to the knight for keeping his word is that the hag turns into a beautiful maiden after the marriage. 
"Sibyl" is from the Greek sibylla, their name for a priestess attached to a shrine or temple who had the ability to utter prophecies. Such a woman would fall into real or pretended fits (which may have been drug-induced) and would utter incoherent sounds which a priest would then interpret in the form of carefully ambiguous sentences. 
Sibyls were supposed to attain great ages, for after all, an old woman, with her great experience, might more plausibly be expected to have arcane knowledge than a young one. Besides, prior to the nineteenth century, births of common people were not registered and individuals who lived to their seventies were rare. A wrinkled old crone was an unusual and somewhat frightening sight and it was easy to believe she had strange powers (of a sibyl in ancient times, of a witch in later times) and had lived for a century and more. 
A mythic explanation is that Sibylla, beloved by Apollo, offered to give herself to him in return for the gift of prophecy and for as many years of life as the grams of sand which she could hold in her hand. When Apollo granted the wish and Sibylla reneged on her own promise, the angry god pointed out that the girl had asked for years of life and not for youth and allowed her to grow older and older and older. 
As for Xanthippe, she was Socrates' wife, and the tales told of her show her to have been a scolding shrew. To be sure, any impartial person would have to admit she had some justification, since Socrates neglected his family to wander about the market place, talking philosophy and teaching rich noblemen without pay, so that his family was always in want. Nevertheless, people aren't impartial. Since Socrates is thought of as the wisest of men and as a kind of pagan saint, Xanthippe is frowned upon for complaining. 


Fair Leda's daughter.. .




The complications grow. Petruchio insists he will woo and win Katherina for her money, quite without regard for her shrewishness. Whereupon it occurs to Hortensio (as earlier it had occurred, independently, to Lucentio) to disguise himself as a teacher and be brought to the house under the patronage of Petruchio. If Petruchio offers to woo Katherina, surely the delighted Baptista will accept his protege for the post of teacher and Hortensio would then be on the inside track with Bianca. 
At this point, though, in comes Gremio, with no one other than the disguised Lucentio. Gremio is going to sponsor the disguised Lucentio for the post of teacher, planning to have the man plead Gremio's cause with Bianca. Then in comes Tranio, in fancy clothes, disguised as his master, Lucentio. He too is heading for Baptista's house to woo Bianca. 
When Gremio and Hortensio object, the disguised Tranio says grandly: 


Fair Leda's daughter had a thousand wooers;

Then well one more may fair Bianca have.

And so she shall. Lucentio shall make one,

Though Paris came in hope to speed alone.





óAct I, scene ii, lines 243-46 


Leda was a queen of Sparta with whom Jupiter fell in love. He visited her in the shape of a swan with the result that eventually Leda laid an egg, out of which Helen was hatched. Helen, as the very epitome of womanly beauty, naturally had many wooers (see page I-90), but was eventually snatched away by Paris. 
There are thus four men now after Bianca. There is 1) Gremio; 2) Hortensio, soon to be disguised as a teacher; 3) Lucentio, already disguised as a teacher; and 4) Tranio, disguised as Lucentio. 
All understand though mat everything depends on how Petruchio fares with Katherina, and Gremio says, gloomily, that that task is liable to be harder than Hercules' twelve labors put together. 


Ö dance barefoot.. .




In Baptista's house, meanwhile, Katherina the Shrew is cruelly baiting her younger sister, Bianca, whose hands she has bound. Katherina is demanding to know which of Bianca's many suitors the younger girl likes best, and one may easily suppose that Kate is annoyed at the ease with which Bianca gains love, while she herself remains with no one. 
This is made the clearer when Baptista comes in, rescues Bianca, and scolds Katherina. Katherina at once accuses Baptista of favoritism: 


Nay, now I see

She is your treasure, she must have a husband;

I must dance barefoot on her wedding day,

And, for your love to her, lead apes in hell.





óAct II, scene i, lines 31-34 


To dance barefoot on the wedding day symbolizes the humiliation of an older unmarried sister on the occasion of a younger sister's marriage. Leading apes in hell is the traditional fate of women who die spinsters. 
Shakespeare seems to be making it quite clear that Katherina is a girl who desperately wants love and who doesn't know how to go about getting it. She lacks the natural charm that is so often visible in a quiet, simpering girl, and the fascination that goes with a spirited temper is somewhat less obvious. 
Shakespeare does not give us the early history of Katherina, but it is not difficult to suppose that her temper was nothing out of the ordinary till a younger sister came along. A quieter little girl, a younger, the baby of the family, would draw the attention of the father, and with every sign of favoritism, Kate would grow wilder in her indignation and Baptista would cling all the more closely to the little one. 
There is no sign that Baptista is actually cruel to Kate, and he is trying to get her a husband, but he cannot conceal the fact that he likes Bianca better, so that the vicious cycle continues till Katherina is virtually mad for lack of love and in becoming so has made it impossible for herself to receive love even if it were offered-or almost impossible. 


Ö in Mantua




Now the pack of suitors enters Baptista's house. Petruchio tackles his Hercules' labor at once, announcing himself in affable fashion, and stating that he has come to woo Katherina, of whose mild and sweet behavior he has heard a great deal. While Baptista stands there gasping at this novel description of his older daughter, Petruchio blandly introduces Hortensio in disguise, urging his acceptance as a music teacher. Petruchio says of his disguised friend: 


His name is Litio, born in Mantua.





óAct II, scene i, line 60 


Thus, another north Italian city is mentioned. Mantua is sixty miles southwest of Padua. 


Ö at RheimsÖ




Old Gremio has his ax to grind too. He wants his teacher (the disguised Lucentio) in the house for his own purposes (though he hasn't an inkling that his candidate for the post fully intends to double-cross him). Gremio introduces the disguised Lucentio under the name of Cambio.
Since the disguised Hortensio has been put forward as a specialist in music and mathematics, Gremio avoids those subjects in order to get his man hired as well. He introduces him, saying: 


Ö this young scholar that hath been long

studying at Rheims-as cunning in Greek,

Latin, and other languages, as the other

in music and mathematics.





óAct II, scene i, lines 79-82 


Rheims (Reims) is not an Italian, but a French city, and is located five hundred miles northwest of Padua. Its distance and its foreignness may serve to give the disguised Lucentio an exotic cachet that would be particularly valued in a teacher. Reims is chiefly noted for the fact that the kings of France were traditionally crowned there (see page II-539). 
Tranio also introduces himself as Lucentio, thus (presumably) making it easier for the real Lucentio to avoid discovery and allowing a two-pronged attack on Bianca. The real Lucentio would win her love for his person, and Tranio, in the guise of Lucentio, would win her father's official permission. 


Ö my super-dainty Kate




Meanwhile, Petruchio asks permission to woo Katherina at once, pleading haste. Hortensio, who has gone inside to teach the girls music, comes flying out with the lute broken over his head, thanks to Katherina's shrewish temper. Petruchio isn't fazed at all. As soon as Katherina enters, breathing fire, he is at her at once, insisting on calling her only by the familiar version of her name. He says: 


Ö you are called plain Kate,

And bonny Kate, and sometimes Kate the curst.

But, Kate, the prettiest Kate in Christendom,

Kate of Kate Hall, my super-dainty Kate,

For dainties are all KatesÖ





óAct II, scene i, lines 185-89 


In Shakespeare's time "cates" were delicacies, luxury foods, and, of course, Petruchio is playing the pun for all it is worth. 


Ö a second Grissel




Katherina hears herself praised in a fashion she has never experienced before, but, alas, she cannot accept it. Nothing will convince her that she is not being ridiculed, so she fights it off, in the old, old way, making it impossible for herself to receive what she most longs to receive. 
But Petruchio is patient, and when after a long battle of wits, she is no less shrewish than she was at the beginning, he simply praises her to her father and announces success. He says to Baptista: 


Ö she's not froward but modest as the dove.

She is not hot but temperate as the morn;

For patience she will prove a second Grissel

And Roman Lucrece for her chastity.

And to conclude, we have 'greed so well together

That upon Sunday is the wedding day.





óAct II, scene i, lines 286-91 


Grissel is a variant form of Griselda, the heroine of the last tale in Boccaccio's Decameron, a tale picked up by Chaucer and included in his Canterbury Tales. The tale is of an Italian nobleman who marries a beautiful and virtuous lowborn maiden named Griselda, whom he proceeds to test. He pretends to kill the two children she bears him, pretends to tire of her and marry a younger woman, and so on. Through a set of unbelievable trials, Griselda remains unbelievably patient and is finally rewarded by being restored to her own in full with her children about her. Griselda has ever since been a byword for patience. 
Lucrece is Shakespeare's favorite pattern of chastity (see page I-205). 


Ö unto Venice




Katherina protests vociferously against the notion of marriage and those who hear this are amused. Petruchio is, however, perfectly calm. Ignoring Kate's shrewish anger, he says: 


Ö I will unto Venice

To buy apparel 'gainst the wedding day.





óAct II, scene i, lines 307-8 


Venice was the richest of the Italian cities. As a great trading center, it was bound to have merchandise from all over the world and therefore a wonderful selection of clothes. 


Ö "supposed Vincentio"




With Katherina taken care of, Bianca must be disposed of. Hortensio is still playing his role as teacher, which leaves Gremio and the disguised Tranio (playing the role of Lucentio) as two official suitors who happen to be on the spot. Baptista offers to give Bianca to whichever of these two can offer more. 
The two start bidding. Since Tranio is not really bidding on his own, he can easily raise the other's bid every time until Gremio is forced out of the competition. On the other hand, Gremio controls his own wealth, whereas Tranio, pretending to be Lucentio, has nothing at all unless his father confirms the bid. 
Baptista therefore says that Tranio (the supposed Lucentio) can have Bianca if his father will guarantee what Tranio has promised; otherwise Gremio can have her. 
This leaves Tranio rather in a fix. Since he's not really Lucentio, he can't really deal with Lucentio's father, Vincentio. Well then, there will have to be still another imposture: 


I see no reason but supposed Lucentio

Must get a father, called "supposed Vincentio."





óAct II, scene i, lines 400-1 


Indoors, meanwhile, the disguised Lucentio and the disguised Hortensio are both teaching Bianca and actually whispering love messages in competition. It becomes clear that Bianca prefers Lucentio. 


To me she's married Ö




Petruchio now puts in his plan to tame Katherina. He is deliberately late for the wedding and when he does come, it is in an impossible costume. He was supposed to have gone to Venice for gorgeous clothing, but he arrives in old, unmatched clothes and riding a horse so old and sick it can barely move. 
The gathered wedding guests are horrified. Surely he cannot mean to let Katherina see him so, let alone marry him so. But he says: 


Good sooth, even thus; therefore ha' done with words.

To me she's married, not unto my clothes.





óAct III, scene ii, lines 116-17 


It is the key to Petruchio's scheme. Katherina must accept him for whatever he is and even for whatever he pretends to be; but she must accept. 
He continues his mad behavior at the wedding, which takes place offstage and which Gremio describes for the audience. Petruchio swears his acceptance of Katherina, strikes the priest, throws wine at the sexton, and kisses the bride with a sound like a cannon report. 
Once they are back from the church, Petruchio announces he must go away at once, with Katherina. All beg him to stay for the wedding feast. He refuses. Katherina begs. He still refuses. 
Whereupon Katherina falls into a fury and orders the wedding feast to proceed. Petruchio agrees, but it must proceed without them. He seizes Katherina and says fiercely to the assembled guests: 


I will be master of what is mine own.

She is my goods, my chattels; she is my house,

My household stuff, my field, my barn,

My horse, my ox, my ass, my anything,

And here she stands. Touch her whoever dare.





óAct III, scene ii, lines 229-33 


There is a glancing reference here to the tenth commandment, which begins "Thou shalt not covet" (see Exodus 21:17) and in listing the examples of objects belonging to a neighbor that must not be coveted, ends with "nor his ox, nor his ass, nor anything that is thy neighbour's." 
There is a strong temptation for males watching the play to feel pleased with Petruchio at this point, but our better natures must assert themselves. This bald assertion of male superiority that treats women as commodities, as animals, as objects, is quite out of line with modern thinking. 
It is quite common to excuse Shakespeare by saying that such male domination was taken for granted in Elizabethan society and that Shakespeare was just echoing his time-but Shakespeare does not take this attitude in any other play. Shakespeare's heroines are, if anything, wiser, more capable, and better than his heroes. We can reasonably assume, then, that Petruchio is doing more than merely express a common attitude toward women-this is all part of his plan and nothing deeper than that. 


Ö in her own humor




Petruchio brings Katherina to his country house. He has been in a shrewish rage all the way, according to his servant, Grumio, who arrives there first. When Petruchio comes onstage, he continues to seem mad with passion. Kate can't rest, eat, or sleep for his yelling and discontent with everything. 
This, however, merely continues the role he has been playing since the day of his wooing. The servants who know him aren't fooled. One says: 


He kills her in her own humor.





óAct IV, scene i, line 174 


And Petruchio himself, in a soliloquy, tells the audience: 


Thus have I politicly [calculatedly] begun my reign,

And 'tis my hope to end successfully.





óAct IV, scene i, lines 182-83 


Of course, Petruchio has the money for which he married Katherina. But he wants, we may suppose, a quiet, loving wife too, and it is for this he plans his course of action. 


.. .the Art to Love




Meanwhile Lucentio's wooing progresses wonderfully well. In his guise as a schoolmaster teaching Latin, he says: 


/ read that I profess, the Art to Love.





óAct IV, scene ii, line 8 


This is Ovid's book which had been indirectly hinted at by Tranio at the very start of the play. The disguised Lucentio says he not only reads The Art to Love, he practices it, and Bianca demurely says she hopes he's good at it. 
Hortensio, in his guise as Litio the music teacher, is outraged at Bianca's open preference for someone who seems a lowborn rascal, and abandons her, saying he will go marry a widow who has long been after him. 


.. .as far as Rome




But while Bianca is accepting the real Lucentio, Tranio (the false Lucentio) must find a false Vincentio to win over Bianca's father. At last an old Pedant who looks the part comes onstage and Tranio stops him and asks if he is traveling on. The Pedant says: 


Ö up farther and as far as Rome,

And so to Tripoli if God lend me life.





óAct IV, scene ii, lines 75-76 


It is a longish journey he plans. It is 250 miles overland due south from Padua to Rome, and then 600 miles across the sea to Tripoli, which is on the north African coast. 
When asked where he is from, he answers:


Of Mantua.





óAct IV, scene ii, line 77 


Mantua is sixty miles west of Padua, so that if he has come to Padua from Mantua on his way to Rome, he has gone at right angles to his proper course. But then, he may not have come directly from Mantua. 
In any case, Tranio at once invents a proclamation in Padua, announcing death to all Mantuans in the city because of some high political quarrel, and offers to save the Pedant's life by allowing him to pose as a Pisan; that is, as Vincentio. The Pedant gratefully accepts. 


Ö perfect love




Katherina is slowly wearing down from lack of food and sleep. She is trying to beg food from Petruchio's servant, Grumio, saying that she is 


Ö starved for meat, giddy for lack of sleep,

With oaths kept waking and with brawling fed.

And that which spites me more than all these wants,

He does it under name of perfect love.





óAct IV, scene iii, lines 9-12 


Surely, this is a key passage. He is wearing her down and forcing her to accept whatever she is offered, not out of cruelty, but in order to force her eventually to accept the one important thing-love. 
It is precisely this which is hardest for her to accept, for, as she says, she is more annoyed at being offered love than at being denied food and sleep. And it is precisely love which she must accept. 


Ö what o'clock I say it is




For all her begging, though, Katherina continues to get no food. What's more, Petruchio promises her clothes but when the haberdasher and tailor arrive, he is utterly discontented with what they offer. Although Katherina cries out that she likes them, he will have none of them, and when Katherina protests, he calmly pretends she is agreeing with him. 
They make ready to go to Padua and visit Katherina's father without new clothes, but in exactly what they are wearing. Petruchio casually says it is seven o'clock and Kate tells him, politely enough, that it is two. Whereupon Petruchio falls into a passion:


7 will not go today, and ere I do,

It shall be what o'clock I say it is.





óAct IV, scene iii, lines 192-93 


That is what Petruchio is after. He must train Katherina to accept as true whatever he says, however ridiculous it must seem to her. 


Ö moon or star Ö




The Pedant in the guise of old Vincentio goes through the matter of the dowry with old Baptista in very satisfactory fashion, and while the fathers are thus engaged, the real Lucentio makes ready to elope with Bianca. 
Meanwhile Petruchio and Katherina (along with Hortensio) are on the road to Padua. Petruchio comments on the brightness of the moon. Katherina points out it is the sun. Whereupon Petruchio falls into a rage again, and says: 


Now by my mother's son, and that's myself,

It shall be moon or star or what 1 list,

Or ere I journey to your father's house.





óAct IV, scene v, lines 6-8 


Finally Katherina breaks down and says, wearily: 


Forward, I pray, since we have come so far,

And be it moon or sun or what you please.

And if you please to call it a rush-candle,

Henceforth I vow it shall be so for me.





óAct IV, scene v, lines 12-15 


Petruchio puts her through her paces, making her say first that the object in the sky is the moon, then the sun. When they meet an old man, he has Katherina greet him first as a young maiden and then apologize and greet him as an old man. Katherina follows the flicking of Petruchio's whip perfectly, accepting whatever he says as true. 
And that prepares her to accept the one thing he has constantly been saying from the moment he met her-that he loves her. 
Thus, by bending Katherina to his will, Petruchio has used a temporary brutality to force the girl to accept what most in the world she has longed to accept-the love of a man. Now, and now only, she can be content


Ö kiss me, Kate. ..




The old man that Petruchio and Katherina have met happens to be Vincentio, the real Vincentio, coming to Padua to see his son. Once he gets there, he goes nearly mad with frustration, for the Pedant claims he is Vincentio and Tranio claims he is Lucentio, so that the true Vincentio can't make himself believed. 
He is saved only by the appearance of the real Lucentio, who is now married to Bianca. Baptista is a little annoyed at the ruse that has kept him from giving Bianca to Gremio, but the real Vincentio approves the match and the two fathers will now settle everything. 
There is another wedding feast and when Katherina wants to join the happy throng, Petruchio says: 


First kiss me, Kate, and we will.





óAct V, scene i, line 142 


Katherina begins to object, for they are in the middle of the street in broad daylight. Petruchio, however, frowns, and Katherina hastily kisses him as nicely as you please. Petruchio says: 


Is not this well? Come my sweet Kate.





óAct V, scene i, line 149 


Of course, it is well. By the kiss, Katherina shows that she has accepted love. It is the triumph of Petruchio, a triumph for love and not for brutality, and Cole Porter did well to name his own musical version of the play Kiss me, Kate. 


Ö she cannot come




At the wedding feast all is gay, and Petruchio, in perfect good humor now, has to withstand a number of quips about being married to a shrew. He waits till the women are gone and proposes a wager. The three newly married men, Lucentio, Hortensio, and himself, are each to send, separately, for their wives. The man with the most obedient wife wins a hundred crowns. 
Lucentio sends first, in perfect confidence. The answer comes back by way of a servant: 


Sir, my mistress sends you word

That she is busy and she cannot come.





óAct V, scene ii, lines 79-80 


The widow whom Hortensio has married does even worse; for the word comes back: 


She says you have some goodly jest in hand.

She will not come. She bids you come to her.





óAct V, scene ii, lines 91-92 


It is not really surprising that sweet Bianca doesn't come. Why should she? She has spent her whole life being sweet Bianca, and simpering and exuding charm, for only one purpose-to catch a man (first her father, then her husband). Well, her catching days are over, at least for a while, and now she means to relax. Wouldn't anyone after a lifetime of work? 
The same for the widow, doubly, since she has had to work a second time to catch a second husband. 


/ command. ..




Lucentio in sending for his wife had told his servant to "bid your mistress." Hortensio, after Bianca's failure, had said "entreat" instead. Petruchio scorns all softness. He says: 


Sirrah Grumio, go to your mistress;

say I command her come to me.





óAct V, scene ii, lines 95-96 


And to everyone's surprise, she does come, in perfect obedience. And again, why not? She had not labored to win love. It had been Petruchio who had labored to give love, and she has every reason to be grateful. 
At his command, Katherina goes back to bring in the other two wives, and the gentle Bianca, when she hears about the lost wager, says to Lucentio: 


The more fool you for laying [betting] on my duty.





óAct V, scene ii, line 129 


Who's the shrew now? 
Petruchio orders Kate to deliver the women a long lecture on the duty they owe their husband and she does, saying in part: 


/ am ashamed that women are so simple

To offer war where they should kneel for peace,





óAct V, scene ii, lines 161-62 


It may seem that this final speech is one long irony and that what Katherina has learned has been to show a false acquiescence so that she can rule her husband by pretending to be ruled by him. (In the movie version with Richard Burton and Elizabeth Taylor, this interpretation is implied in the very last post-speech action.) 
Yet it is not necessary to suppose this. It doesn't matter who "rules." Petruchio and Katherina are in love and as long as love exists, "ruler" and "ruled" lose their meaning. Petruchio looked only for money, and got love too. Katherina looked for nothing and got love. It is a completely happy ending. 








16. The Two Gentlemen Of Verona


Of Shakespeare's early comedies, The Two Gentlemen of Verona, written about 1594, is perhaps the most forgettable. It is so weak, in fact, that some critics think it may have been written as early as 1590 or else that the version we now have is a mangled copy of the real play. 
Shakespeare may have used as his source material for the play an unfinished romance, Diana Enamorada, written in Spanish by a Portugal-born poet, Jorge de Montemayor, in 1542. The only difficulty with that suggestion is that the romance was not translated into English until 1598, some four years after The Two Gentlemen of Verona was written. We might speculate that Shakespeare saw the English translation in manuscript or that he saw the French translation, which had appeared in 1578. 
Verona, where the play opens, is a city in north-central Italy. It is a favorite setting for Renaissance comedy and was briefly mentioned in The Taming of the Shrew as the home town of Petruchio (see page I-451). It is also the home town of the two friends who are protagonists in this play. 


Ö young Leander Ö




The play opens with the two gentlemen of Verona on the scene. They are Valentine and Proteus. The latter name is significant. In Greek mythology, Proteus was an infinitely changeable sea deity (see page II-655), and much of the action in this play is produced by the changeable character of the Proteus we now meet. 
Valentine and Proteus, it seems, are about to part. Valentine is setting off on his travels, for in Shakespeare's time, a period of travel in youth was considered an essential part of the education of a young man. 
Proteus, however, prefers to remain at home in Verona, for he is in love with a young lady and will not leave her. Valentine teases Proteus, saying that the latter is so lovesick that even in praying, he will do soÖ 


Ö on some shallow story of deep love:

How young Leander crossed the Hellespont.




óAct I, scene i, lines 21-22


The Hellespont (better known today as the Dardanelles) is a narrow strait, about forty miles long, separating Turkey and Greece, and it forms part of the waterway connecting the Black Sea with the Mediterranean. At its narrowest it is only three fourths of a mile wide. On the European side in ancient times was the Greek city of Sestos, where a beautiful young girl, Hero, served as priestess of Aphrodite, according to a tale that was told in antiquity and that has never lost its popularity. On the Asian side, in the Greek city of Abydos, lived a handsome youth named Leander. 
Hero and Leander met at a festival and fell instantly in love. Thereafter, every night Leander swam the Hellespont to be with Hero, guided by a light she placed in her window. One stormy night, the light was blown out and Leander lost his way and was drowned. When his dead body was washed ashore, the grief-stricken Hero plunged into the waters to her own death. 
The tale is a favorite of Shakespeare's. He mentions it several times.


To MilanÖ




But Valentine must leave and the two friends cannot talk long. Valentine says: 


Once more adieu!

My father at the road

Expects my coming, there to see me shipped.





óAct I, scene i, lines 53-54 


Verona isn't a seaport, to be sure. It is sixty-five miles from the sea. Perhaps Valentine means to travel overland to Venice and take ship there; or to travel to the sea by way of the Adige River, on which Verona is located. That depends, of course, on where he is going, and he tells us quickly, for he says to Proteus: 


To Milan let me hear from thee by letters

Of thy success in love. ..





óAct I, scene i, lines 57-58 


But Milan is not a seaport either (it is seventy-five miles north of Genoa) and cannot be reached directly by sea. One has the vision of Valentine traveling sixty-five miles to Venice, taking ship all around Italy to Genoa, a voyage of about one thousand four hundred miles, and then traveling seventy-five miles overland to Milan. 
This is scarcely necessary, since in actual fact Milan is only ninety miles due west of Verona over undoubtedly well-traveled roads. One can argue, of course, that there were ways of traveling from Verona to Milan by inland waterways, but it is much more likely that Shakespeare simply didn't bother checking his geography. Nor need he have really. The audience wouldn't care and the actual cities have nothing to do with the story. It might just as well have been London and Amsterdam with an appropriate sea voyage between. 


Attends the Emperor Ö




With Valentine gone, Proteus turns his attention to his love for Julia, who, it quickly turns out, returns his love fully and is coy only out of maidenly modesty (and, perhaps, design too, to make herself more dearly valued). 
And yet Proteus' stay in Verona does not entirely please his father, Antonio, who wants his son educated too. He discusses the matter with Pan-thino, who is listed as his servant in the cast of characters, and Panthino is all in favor of sending Proteus on his travels. He says:


/ think your lordship is not ignorant

How his companion, youthful Valentine,

Attends the Emperor in his royal court.





óAct I, scene iii, lines 25-27 


Through the most famous part of its history, in the fifteenth century, Milan was an independent duchy and the Duke of Milan was one of the best-known princes in Italy. There were two famous lines of these dukes, Visconti and Sforza, and indeed it is the Duke of Milan (unnamed) who is an important character in the play. Why, then, this reference to the Em-seror? 
To be sure, Milan had an imperial past. In the fourth century it, rather than Rome, was the place of residence of the Roman emperors in the West, and it was from Milan, for instance, that the Roman Emperor Constantine [issued his edict establishing official toleration of Christianity in 313. 
More likely to have influenced Shakespeare's thinking, however, was the fact that in 1535 Milan lost its independence and became part of the wide-spreading dominions of Emperor Charles V (see page II-747). Shakespeare may have associated Milan with the Empire so thoroughly that he spoke of the Emperor when he meant to refer to the situation as it had been a century earlier and speak of the Duke. (Or else the term "Emperor" is just another fault in the mangled copy of the original play on which alone our present version is based.) 
And so, impressed by Valentine's success at the court of Milan, Antonio decides to send his son, Proteus, there too, and Proteus, to his chagrin [for he has just learned of Julia's love for him), finds he must go. 
Now begin the complications. In Milan Valentine has fallen deeply in love with Silvia, the daughter of the Duke of Milan. She is presented as a paragon of beauty and virtue. Also in love with her is Thurio, much inferior to Valentine in looks and character, but who the Duke has destined to be her husband. As for Silvia, there is soon no doubt it is Valentine she loves. 
Into this triangle comes Proteus, who has taken an emotional leave of Julia and has exchanged rings with her as tokens of love. As soon as Proteus meets Silvia, however, he demonstrates his right to his name. He changes completely, falling in love with Silvia on the instant, forgetting his Julia, and at once planning to betray his friend. 
Valentine intends to use a rope ladder to get to Silvia's window and lope with her. He confides this to Proteus, who promptly passes the information on to the Duke. The Duke therefore confronts Valentine, who is on his way to the elopement, and has no trouble at all in catching him out. In a rage, the Duke banishes Valentine from his court, leaving the field that much clearer for the perfidious Proteus.


Ö with a codpiece Ö




Meanwhile, Julia, left behind in Verona by Proteus, can endure her loneliness no longer. She determines to travel to Milan to see him, and to avoid the troubles that might come to an unattended maiden on a voyage such as that, she decides to dress like a man. 
This is a convention used by Shakespeare in several of his plays (though first, chronologically, in this one), and to us it carries no conviction at all. The audience is invariably amused that the hero cannot see that under the male clothing a female lies barely concealed, and gains but a poor notion of the hero's powers of observation. However, a convention is a convention (like the one in the movies whereby whenever two lovers in isolation begin a love duet, the sound of an orchestra appears out of nowhere). Besides, in Shakespeare's time female parts were played by boys, and to have a boy-Julia dress up like a man was much more convincing than to have a girl-Julia do so. In fact, it was when the boy-Julia was playing Julia as a girl that he may have been least convincing. 
In this play, at any rate, Shakespeare does manage to point out some of the difficulties of trying to switch outward appearances. Julia's maid, Lu-cetta, who disapproves of her mistress' plan, asks coldly how to make the breeches, and when Julia tells her to make them any way she pleases, Lu-cetta answers: 


You must needs have them with a codpiece, madam,





óAct II, scene vii, line 53 


A codpiece was a baglike affair, covering the opening in the front of the breeches. It was, in effect, a container for the penis and was quite fashionable in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. There was a tendency to fill it out with stuffing of one sort or another, partly as protection, and partly to make the organ seem more prominent than it was (much in the way that ladies' brassieres are tampered with in our own times). They might also be decorated or prinked out for the same purpose. 
Naturally, the maidenly Julia is shocked at the mention of the object, but Lucetta says: 


A round hose, madam, now's not worth a pin,

Unless you have a codpiece to stick pins on.




óAct II, scene vii, lines 55-56 


The reference to the codpiece as a pincushion is Lucetta's wry way of saying that Julia will have nothing inside to interfere with that use. It may also be a sardonic reference to men who use so much stuffing that pins may safely be stuck in it Despite Lucetta's discouragement, Julia remains firm in her determination to make the trip. 


Ö from MantuaÖ




Valentine, traveling sadly away from Milan, falls in with a group of outlaws in a forest through which he is passing. Valentine points out he has no money and pretends he has been banished for having killed a man in a duel. 
The fact that he has no money spoils him as a victim; the fact that he has killed a man commends him as a comrade; and the fact that he is handsome seems to have an effect also. The Third Outlaw says: 


By the bare scalp of Robin Hood's fat friar,

This fellow were a king for our wild faction!




óAct IV, scene i, lines 36-37 


Any mention of outlaws would instantly remind an English audience of Robin Hood, and Shakespeare is usually very responsive to his audience. The "fat friar" is, of course, Friar Tuck, who scarcely needs further words to an American audience either. 
The outlaws then introduce themselves to Valentine, for it seems that many of them are gentlemen who have been outlawed for some little prank or other which are common to hot-blooded young men of high birth. As the Second Outlaw says, in what seems to be an aggrieved tone, concerning his own outlawry: 


And I from Mantua, for a gentleman

Who, in my mood, I stabbed unto the heart.




óAct IV, scene i, lines 50-51 


Mantua was briefly mentioned in The Taming of the Shrew as the home town of the Pedant (see page II-454). It is about twenty-five miles southwest of Verona and in Shakespeare's tune (and for nearly five centuries before) it was an independent duchy. 


Ö at Pentecost




Meanwhile, Proteus continues to betray everyone in sight. Having abandoned Julia and having treated Valentine most despicably, he is now prepared to double-cross Thurio. Under the pretense of pushing the latter's suit with Silvia, Proteus woos her for himself, singing for her the lovely ballad "Who is Silvia?" 
Julia, in her male disguise, has come in time to hear it and understands at once the extent of Proteus' duplicity. She also hears Silvia nobly remain faithful to her Valentine and scorn Proteus as a traitor. Silvia urges Proteus to return to Julia (of whom she has apparently heard). 
Silvia plans to flee from Milan and make her way to Valentine, wherever he is, while Julia decides to carry her plan one step further by attempting to gain employment with Proteus as his servant, under the name of Sebastian. 
Proteus does indeed employ her and at once uses her as his go-between with Silvia. Sebastian and Silvia fall to discussing Julia, and Silvia wants to know how tall she is. Sebastian says: 


About my stature: for, at Pentecost,

When all our pageants of delight were played,

Our youth got me to play the woman's part,

And I was trimmed in Madam Julia's gown,

Which served me as fit, by all men's judgments

As if the garment had been made for me.




óAct IV, scene iv, lines 158-63 


Pentecost was originally a Jewish harvest festival ("Shabuoth") celebrated seven weeks after Passover. (The Hebrew word means "weeks.") Its celebration came on the fiftieth day counting from the first day of Passover. For that reason it received the name Pentecost, which is from a Greek word meaning "fiftieth." 
Pentecost gamed a special Christian significance because it was on that day, the first celebration after the crucifixion of Jesus, that the apostles received the inspiration of the Holy Spirit. Thus, in Acts 2:1-4, it says: "And when the day of Pentecost was fully come, they were all with one accord in one place. And suddenly there came a sound from heaven as of a rushing mighty wind, and it filled all the house where they were sitting. And there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them. And they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance." 
Consequently, Pentecost remained an important Christian holiday and was celebrated on the seventh Sunday after Easter. 
Easter and Pentecost were favored times for baptisms, but in England and other parts of northern Europe Pentecost was the more often used because it came in a warmer season of the year (late May or early June). Since the newly baptized generally wore white for a week to signify the new-washed purity of their souls, Pentecost is commonly called Whitsunday ("White Sunday") in England. Some speculate that this is really "Wit Sunday" ("Wisdom Sunday") celebrating the time when spiritual wisdom rained down upon the apostles. 
Naturally, Pentecost was a joyous holiday and was celebrated with dances, plays, and other outdoor amusements. 


Ö Ariadne passioning




Julia describes her Pentecost role, saying: 


Ö / did play a lamentable part.

Madam, 'twas Ariadne passioning

For Theseus' perjury and unjust flight,





óAct IV, scene iv, lines 166-68 


Julia, in her guise as Sebastian, is thinking of herself, of course, for she is much in Ariadne's position (see page I-31). 


Ö Silvia I give thee




But now the action speeds up bewilderingly. 
Silvia flees Milan to seek for Valentine. Her father, the Duke, and also Thurio and Proteus leave in pursuit of her while Julia follows Proteus. 
Silvia is captured by the outlaws and is rescued by Proteus, but she still refuses to listen to his protestations of love (which Valentine overhears, so that he learns the truth at last). 
The desperate Proteus threatens rape and then, finally, Valentine confronts his false friend. After Valentine's tongue-lashing, Proteus tearfully repents and at once Valentine forgives him. Valentine does more than that, in fact. He says: 


Ö that my love may appear plain and free,

All that was mine in Silvia I give thee.





óAct V, scene iv, lines 82-83 


Most critics find it utterly beyond the bounds of reason to suppose that Valentine should on an instant forgive an all-but-unforgivable falseness in his friend and then abandon his love to him as well-to say nothing of the insult offered Silvia in treating her as though she were a sack of wheat to be bartered. Some suspect a corrupt text, an ill-remembered denouement, a cut version. 
Any of these possibilities may be so for all we know, and yet it might also be argued that Shakespeare meant it exactly as it stands. There is some reason to suspect that Shakespeare may have had homosexual tendencies (see page I-4), but there are no outright homosexuals in his plays except for Patroclus in Troilus and Cressida (see page I-98), and that was enforced by the Greek tale. Nevertheless, there are a number of cases in the romances in which friendship between males is suspiciously close and in which the language used between them is suspiciously ardent. The case of Valentine and Proteus is one of them and it is just possible to argue that Shakespeare was trying to maintain that affection between males was a higher and stronger emotion than that between the opposite sexes. 
When Proteus gives up Silvia after being reproached by Valentine and then asks forgiveness, he is implicitly abandoning the lesser love (female) for the greater (male), and what can Valentine do but reciprocate and hand the lesser love back? 
Fortunately for heterosexual sensibilities, this does not happen. When Valentine makes his offer, "Sebastian" swoons. Her true identity is discovered and the repentant Proteus is thus reunited with his ever true Julia. 
The Duke and Thurio are also captured by the outlaws and Thurio shows himself to be a coward, while Valentine's bravery is conspicuous. The Duke of Milan therefore consents to have Valentine marry Silvia. Even the outlaws are forgiven and are taken into the employ of the Duke. All is happy as the curtain descends. 








17. The Tragedy of Romeo And Juliet


In Romeo and Juliet Shakespeare dramatized a love tale that was well known and much wept over by young people before his time. The nub of the tale, that of two young lovers unnecessarily dying for love through misunderstandings and family feuding, is not a very difficult thing to invent, and examples date back to ancient times. 
The tale of Pyramus and Thisbe, for instance, which Shakespeare burlesques in A Midsummer Night's Dream (see page I-48), has such a plot. Indeed, both Romeo and Juliet and A Midsummer Night's Dream were written at about the same time (1595 probably) and there are some who suggest that in the version of the Pyramus and Thisbe legend presented by the Athenian laborers, Shakespeare was deliberately satirizing his own just-completed Romeo and Juliet. (For myself, I find this difficult to believe.) 
The first version of a plot which is specifically that of Romeo and Juliet appeared in a collection of romances, Il Novellino published in Italian in 1476 by Masuccio Salernitano. It was adapted and, in the process, made into something considerably closer to the Shakespearean version (down to the names of the characters) by Luigi da Porto in or about 1530. 
The first important English version of the story was in the form of a long narrative poem, The Tragical History of Romeus and Juliet, published in 1562 by the English translator Arthur Brooke. It was Brooke's poem that Shakespeare used as his direct source, following it quite closely, but adding (needless to say) master touches of his own. 


In fair Verona.. .




The play opens with a "Chorus," who explains the subject matter, beginning: 


Two households, both alike in dignity,

In fair Verona, where we lay our scene,

From ancient grudge break to new mutiny,





óPrologue, lines 1-3 


Verona (see page I-451) is mentioned in The Taming of the Shrew and is the place in which The Two Gentlemen of Verona opens. The city first appears as the scene of the Romeo and Juliet story in Da Porto's version. The earlier Salernitano version placed the tale in Siena, 150 miles south of Verona. 
The actual scene does not matter, of course. The play is not historical and it is not confined to any particular city. It could just as easily, with very minor modifications, have taken place in England, and in the contemporary musical West Side Story it is transferred, fairly intact, to the New York of today. 
Nevertheless, if we consider Verona, we find that in the play it is treated as an independent principality, something which it was in history only between 1260 and 1387. 
That period would well fit the vision of an Italian city split by the rivalry of internal factions led by competing noble families, whose enmity resulted in street fighting with private armies of retainers and sympathizers. 
Most Italian cities of the time contained those who favored a strong and centralized secular government under the German Emperor (Ghibellines) and others who favored a congeries of independent city-states under the moral leadership of the Pope (Guelphs). Families lined up on this side or that and feuded in consequence, or sometimes they had feuds for other reasons and lined up on opposite sides in consequence. 
In Florence, for instance, the most famous city of Renaissance Italy, there arose about 1300 a deadly feud between the two families of the Cerchi and the Donati. It began over some trivial incident but gradually each side drew to itself others, so that the Cerchi headed the "Bianca" (White) faction, which was Ghibelline, while the Donati headed the "Nera" (Black) faction, which was Guelf. The whole city was torn in two by them and for nearly half a century its history was determined by the ups and downs of what had begun as a family feud. 
Shakespeare does not give the nature of the feud between the Veronese households, and there is no indication that it is political in nature. 


Ö the house of MontagueÖ




The play opens on a Sunday (from internal evidence), with two retainers of the Capulet faction coming onstage. They are indistinguishable from comic English servingmen (as are all Shakespeare's comic lower-class characters, regardless of the supposed nationality of the upper-class ones) and are given the most un-Italian names of Sampson and Gregory. 
They boast to each other of their desperate bravery and Sampson says: 


A dog of the house of Montague moves me.





óAct I, scene i, line 8 


The Montagues are one of the feuding families, and the Capulets the other. In Da Porto's version, the two quarreling households of Verona are given the names of Montecchi and Capelletti, but for English audiences the very similar Montague and Capulet would be more congenial to the ear. 


Put up your swords Ö




The two Capulet retainers deliberately provoke two others of the Montague faction who enter later. The Montague retainers are ready to be provoked and there is suddenly swordplay. 
One of the leaders of the Montagues, Benvolio, enters now and runs forward, anxious to stop the proceedings. He cries out: 


Part, fools!

Put up your swords. You know not what you do.





óAct I, scene i, lines 66-67 


Throughout, Benvolio endeavors to make peace, to end the feud or at least to keep it blanketed. This is evident in his very name, which is Shakespeare's invention since the equivalent character in Brooke's poem is not named. "Benvolio" means "good will." 
Benvolio's attempt at conciliation is only one of several indications in the play that the family feud is dying. It is possible to argue that it could easily be ended altogether by some sensible and decisive act of placation on one side or the other. The fact that this does not happen adds to the eventual tragedy. 


Turn thee, Benvolio Ö




Indeed, the chief reason that the feud is not ended appears immediately. Hard upon Benvolio's entry comes the evil genius of the play, Tybalt, of the house of Capulet. Furiously, he cries out to the peacemaking Benvolio: 


What, art thou drawn among these heartless [cowardly] hinds?

Turn thee, Benvolio; look upon thy death.





óAct I, scene i, lines 68-69 


Benvolio protests that he is merely using his sword to break up the fight and keep the peace, but Tybalt will have none of it:


What, drawn, and talk of peace? I hate the word

As I hate hell, all Montagues, and thee.





óAct I, scene i, lines 72-73 


This is the clearest expression in the play of the irrational psychology of all that is meant by "feuding." It is almost the only expression. It is Tybalt, the only irrational hater among the leaders of the factions, who prevents the triumph of reason. 
In Da Porto's tale, the corresponding character is Thebaldo, but it is a happy stroke to change it to Tybalt. It brings on thoughts of the folk tale of "Reynard the Fox" (see page I-153), in which Tibert was the name of the cat. A common version of this was Tybalt, so that to the Elizabethan audience, the very use of the name at once brings up the picture of this particular Capulet as a quarrelsome and vicious tomcat. 


Your lives shall payÖ




The fight, forced on Benvolio by Tybalt, continues to expand. Other members of the faction arrive, including even Capulet and Montague themselves, the aged heads of the family (whose wives sternly refuse to let them fight), until finally the Prince of Verona himself appears on the scene. 
He is, quite understandably, exasperated at this disorder in the streets. There have been three such incidents and his patience is at an end. He says, angrily: 


// ever you disturb our streets again,

Your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace.





óAct I, scene i, lines 99-100 


The name of the Prince is given as Escalus. No Veronese prince of that name is known, but, interestingly enough, Verona was ruled from 1227 to 1259 by Ezzelino da Romano. That may be no more than coincidence. 


Ö Dian's wit




When the streets are cleared, Lady Montague expresses her relief that her son, Romeo, was not involved. It turns out that Romeo has taken to mooning sadly about in a fashion which, to Elizabethan audiences, marks the conventional symptoms of unrequited love. Romeo is no sooner spoken of than he appears in the guise of the romantic lover. 
The older Montagues are puzzled by Romeo's behavior and Benvolio volunteers to discover the cause. The task is easy, for Romeo admits to unrequited love at once. Romeo says of the girl he loves: 


She'll not be hit With Cupid's arrow.

She hath Dian's wit,





óAct I, scene i, lines 211-12 


Romeo does not name her at this point and, indeed, she never appears in the play. 
Romeo's moan is that the girl he loves insists on chastity. She has "Dian's wit" and Diana is the Roman goddess of the hunt (analogous to the Greek Artemis, a virgin goddess sworn to chastity). 
Benvolio therefore gives Romeo the very sensible advice to find someone else, but Romeo rejects that advice scornfully. (It is the sad fact that whereas Benvolio is always sensible, Romeo is always romantic, and that too helps bring on the catastrophe.) 


Ö to keep the peace




On the other side, Capulet is talking with Count Paris, a kinsman of Prince Escalus. Their talk at first is of the feud and here it seems quite obvious that there is little real interest in keeping it alive. Capulet says: 


Ö 'tis not hard, I think,

For men so old as we [he and Montague] to keep the peace.





óAct I, scene ii, lines 2-3 


Paris agrees and says: 


Of honorable reckoning are you both,

And pity 'tis you lived at odds so long.





óAct I, scene ii, lines 4-5 


What more do we need to see that only a face-saving formula is needed and the feud will be gladly abandoned. 


Ö fourteen years




But Capulet has more on his mind than the peace, and so has Paris. Capulet has a lovely daughter and Paris would like to marry her. It would be a good match and Capulet is eager for it. He is held back by only one thought. Perhaps the girl is too young. He says:


My child is yet a stranger in the world,

She hath not seen the change of fourteen years;





óAct I, scene ii, lines 8-9 


He is speaking of Juliet, the heroine of the play, and as is stated and emphasized on several occasions, she is not quite fourteen! Her very name is a diminutive, for Juliet means "little Julia." (There was a Julia in The Two Gentlemen of Verona who was also a sweet and plucky girl of that city, though she could scarcely have been as young as Juliet.) 
In Elizabethan times, of course, life went more quickly. Girls became marriageable more quickly, were made mothers more quickly, and died more quickly. Nevertheless, fourteen is rather young. Shakespeare does not bother giving the ages of any of the heroines of his other early plays; only in this one does he make an exception, and for no obvious reason, he emphasizes it strenuously. -Perhaps there is a reason. 
My fair niece Rosaline Ö 
Circumstances now begin to complicate matters. Even while Capulet is talking to Paris, he is making preparations for a feast that very night. He gives the list of invited guests to a servant and tells him to go through Verona and invite them all. 
But as the fates would have it, the servant who receives this order is illiterate and has no chance to explain that fact to the hasty Capulet. 
And, as the fates would further have it, in come Romeo and Benvolio, still discussing the former's romantic love affair, and it is to Romeo that the servant applies for help in reading off the names of the invited guests. Romeo obliges and, included on the list are: 


Mercutio and his brother Valentine;

Mine uncle Capulet, his wife and daughters;

My fair niece Rosaline; Livia;

Signior Valentio and his cousin Tybalt;





óAct I, scene ii, lines 69-72 


It is Rosaline with whom Romeo is in love, and this means that Rosaline, as the niece of Capulet, is shown to be a member of the opposing faction. 
Yet this does not seem to bother anybody at all. To be sure, Romeo has not mentioned her name; to do so would ill fit his mood of romantic melancholy. Yet he doesn't keep it entirely secret, either, for he has apparently imparted the identity of his loved one to Benvolio since the close of the first scene. Thus, Benvolio says to Romeo:


At this same ancient feast of Capulet's

Sups the fair Rosaline whom thou so lov'st;





óAct I, scene ii, lines 85-86 


Can it be that Rosaline has turned down Romeo because of the feud between their families? There is no mention of any such thing. Romeo has stated that Rosaline has sworn herself to indiscriminate chastity. 
Is there any sign of danger at all in this love affair of Romeo's that crosses the lines of the feud? No one makes any mention of it. Even the cautious Benvolio does not seem to remark danger in it. In fact, Benvolio, still anxious to wean Romeo away from a useless love that makes him unhappy, advises him to attend the ball, saying: 


Go thither, and with unattainted eye

Compare her face with some that I shall show,

And I will make thee think thy swan a crow.





óAct I, scene ii, lines 88-90 


So unimportant is the feud, in other words, that even the cautious Benvolio sees no danger in walking right into the center and hotbed of the Capulet faction. 


Ö Lammas EveÖ




It is time to introduce Juliet now. Lady Capulet wishes to broach the subject of marriage to her, but with her also is Juliet's garrulous old Nurse, who had a daughter Juliet's age, for she says, referring to Juliet: 


Susan and she (God rest all Christian souls!)

Were of an age.





óAct I, scene iii, lines 18-19 


If the Nurse were to serve as surrogate breast feeder for Juliet, she would have to have had a child of her own shortly before. More important, this leads to talk of Juliet's age once more. The Nurse says: 


I'll lay fourteen of my teeth-

And yet to my teen [sorrow] be it spoken, I have but four-

She's not fourteen.





óAct I, scene iii, lines 12-14 


The Nurse then launches into an irrelevant tale of Juliet's childhood that begins


Ö of all days in the year,

Come Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen.





óAct I, scene iii, lines 16-17 


Lammas Day is August 1. In early English times it was the day of a harvest festival, and the fruits of the field, symbolized by half loaves of bread, were consecrated at mass. The Anglo-Saxon term for half loaf was "hlaf-maesse" and this was distorted to "Lammas." 
Earlier the Nurse had asked Lady Capulet how long it was to Lammas-tide and had been answered: 


A fortnight and odd days.





óAct I, scene iii, line 15 


We can therefore place the beginning of the play at about July 13. It is summer and the hot weather is referred to later in the play. 
There must be some reason why Shakespeare harps so on Juliet's age. 


Ö since the earthquake.. .




The Nurse has another way of dating Juliet's age, too, for she remembers the circumstances of the weaning. She says: 


'Tis since the earthquake now eleven years;

And she was weanedÖ





óAct I, scene iii, lines 23-24


This verse has sometimes been given special significance, for in 1580 there was a notable earthquake felt in London. The argument is therefore presented that this was referred to at this point and that the play was consequently written in 1591. This seems awfully thin, however, and most critics do not accept the reasoning at all. 
The garrulous Nurse is finally persuaded to be silent and Lady Capulet begins to talk Juliet into marriage. She takes the opportunity at once to stymie any objections as to age, by saying: 


By my count,

I was your mother much upon these years

That you are now a maid.





óAct I, scene iii, lines 71-73 


Apparently, then, Lady Capulet is herself some twenty-eight years old. Juliet, however, seems unmoved by the thoughts of marriage and Lady Capulet tells her that Paris will be at the banquet that night and she can look him over and decide whether she can love him. 


Ö 'tis no wit Ö




In the next scene it is later in the day and the Capulet feast will soon begin. In the street outside come Romeo and Benvolio, who plan to attend in masks. 
This seems to give an impression that it is dangerous for the Montagues to invade the Capulet feast, but the presence of masks does not necessarily prove it. Masking at feasts was common and masked dances are featured in Henry VIII (see page II-761) and Love's Labor's Lost (see page I-440), for instance. Masks afforded young men and ladies a chance to flirt in semiconcealment. 
To weaken the case for danger, Romeo does no more than wear a mask. He makes no attempt to disguise his voice, for instance, and is, in point of fact, readily recognized at the feast, as will soon be apparent. 
To be sure, Romeo does express reservations about going. He says: 


Öwe mean well in going to this masque,

But 'tis no wit to go.





óAct I, scene iv, lines 48-49 


But when asked why, he can only say: 


/ dreamt a dream tonight [last night].





óAct I, scene iv, line 50 


If the feud were really alive and deadly, he could easily have said that it was "no wit to go" because discovery would mean death. To fall back on a dream, a mere presentiment of evil, shows how little importance Romeo attaches to the feud. 


Ö Queen MabÖ




With Romeo and Benvolio is a friend, Mercutio, who is of neither faction and is friendly with both, for he has been invited to the feast. He is, it appears, a relative of Prince Escalus. 
Mercutio is, in essence, Shakespeare's invention. Da Porto had a minor character named Marcuccio, but Shakespeare took that and touched it with his own special gold even down to the small change in the name. Mercutio suggests Mercury, the winged messenger of the gods, who flits through the air with superhuman speed. Mercutio is mercurial, with a flashing wit that never leaves him. 
Mercutio does not seem to think of the feud as a deadly thing either. He makes no attempt to dissuade the Montagues from going, as he might well have done if there were real danger. Rather, he is intent on rallying Romeo out of his melancholy and is so anxious to have him come to the feast that he eagerly turns dream presentiments into nonsense by advancing his own theory on the origin of dreams as the product of a tricky elf. He says: 


O, then I see Queen Mab hath been with you.

She is the fairies' midwife, and she conies

In shape no bigger than an agate stone





óAct I, scene iv, lines 53-55 


Queen Mab is out of Celtic mythology. The pagan Irish had a goddess named Meadhbh, who was the ruler of a group of the "little people." This may have contributed to the notion of Queen Mab. 
Queen Mab need not be considered a fairy queen in the sense that Titania was in A Midsummer Night's Dream (see page I-26). She is the fairies' "midwife"; that is, she helps men and women give birth to dreams, and this is no task for a queen. 
Here, in all likelihood, "Queen" is used in its original sense of "woman" and to speak of "Queen Mab" would be something like speaking of "Dame Mab" or "Mistress Mab." The word "queen" early split into two forms: one of them, "quean," degenerated to mean a degraded woman, a harlot; the other, "queen," rose to mean an elevated woman, the wife of a king. "Queen," in its ordinary original sense, neither depressed nor elevated, vanished altogether. 
Mercutio's speech about Queen Mab presents the view that dreams are not messages of fate but the product of the routine thoughts of the day. Lovers dream of love, courtiers of curtsies, lawyers of fees; soldiers of war and drink, and so on. This is one of many examples of Shakespeare's modern-sounding rationalism. 
Thus, when Romeo tries to stem the flow of Mercutio's brilliance and says: 


Peace, peace, Mercutio, peace!

Thou talk'st of nothing.





óAct I, scene iv, lines 95-96 


Mercutio answers at once, with stabbing relevance: 


True, I talk of dreams.





óAct I, scene iv, line 96 


Ö a Montague, our foe




Within the mansion the feast is in full progress. The masked dancers are enjoying themselves and Romeo sees Juliet for the first time. He falls immediately and hopelessly in love and completely vindicates Benvolio's promise that Romeo had but to look at other women to forget Rosaline. Romeo says: 


Did my heart love till now:

Forswear it, sight! For I ne'er saw true beauty till this night.





óAct I, scene v, lines 54-55 


But his voice is overheard and instantly recognized-and by Tybalt, the only person of consequence in either faction who takes the feud seriously. He flares into mad rage at once and is prepared to kill. He says: 


This, by his voice, should be a Montague.

Fetch me my rapier, boy.





óAct I, scene v, lines 56-57 


Capulet is at once aware that Tybalt is in a passion and demands the reason. Tybalt says: 


Uncle, this is a Montague, our foe,

A villain.. .





óAct I, scene v, lines 63-64 


Capulet is not moved in the slightest. He recognizes Romeo at once and says to Tybalt: 


Ö let him alone.

'A bears him like a portly [respectable] gentleman,

And, to say truth, Verona brags of him

To be a virtuous and well-governed youth.





óAct I, scene v, lines 67-70 


Surely the feud is as good as dead when the leader of one side can speak so of the son and heir of the leader of the other side. Capulet speaks so highly of Romeo, in fact, that one could almost imagine that a prospective match between Montague's son and Capulet's daughter would be a capital way of ending the feud. 
Then, when Tybalt objects to Capulet's tame endurance of the presence of a Montague, the old man isn't in the least shamed into taking a stronger stand. On the contrary, he turns savagely on Tybalt, crying: 


You are a saucy boy. Is't so, indeed?

This trick may chance to scathe [harm] you.





-Act I, scene v, lines 85-86 


Tybalt, trembling with frustrated rage, is forced to withdraw. 


Ö my only hate




Meanwhile, Romeo has made his way to Juliet, who is as instantly struck with him as he by her. In fifteen lines he reaches the stage of kissing her. He must leave soon after and Juliet inquires his name of the Nurse. She finds out he is Romeo, the son of Montague, and says at once, dramatically: 


My only love, sprung from my only hate!





óAct I, scene v, line 140 


It turns out later in the play that she was particularly close to her cousin Tybalt. We can imagine, without too much trouble, young Juliet listening with awe and admiration to the tales told her by her paranoid cousin; of fights with the Montagues, of their disgraceful defeats and treacherous victories. Tybalt would surely have poured into her ears all the sick preoccupation with the feud that filled his own wrathful heart. 
And she would have absorbed it all. That may well be the point of Shakespeare's stressing Juliet's extreme youth. She was young enough to absorb the feud in its full romanticism without any admixture of disillusionment that would have come with experience. 


Ö King Cophetua. ..




Although Romeo has left the feast, he cannot really leave. He must have another sight of Juliet if he can. Slipping away from his companions, he climbs the wall bounding the Capulet estate and finds himself in the orchard. 
Benvolio and Mercutio come seeking him, and Mercutio in mockery calls after him with all the cliches of lovers' tales. He asks of the hiding Romeo just one word about Venus or Cupid as a sign of his whereabouts, defining Cupid, ironically, as: 


Ö he that shot so true

When King Cophetua loved the beggar maid!





óAct II, scene i, lines 13-14 


This is another reference (see page I-431) to the famous tale of the happy love of a socially ill-assorted couple. 
But Romeo remains in hiding, and Benvolio and Mercutio shrug and leave. Surely if the feud were alive and dangerous, they would never have left Romeo alone in the very center of enemy territory. Instead, they seem not a bit concerned. 


Ö refuse thy name




Romeo's patience is rewarded, for Juliet (as lovesick as he) comes out on her balcony to sigh romantically. 
Romeo, spying her, indulges in a long soliloquy in which he praises her beauty in the most extravagant terms, but never once mentions the fact that she is a Capulet. It does not seem to concern him that she is of the opposing faction any more than it concerned him that Rosaline was. But then, Romeo is not fourteen and he is old enough to know the feud is really on its last legs. 
Not so Juliet. She speaks at last and all her talk is of the feud. She says: 


O Romeo, Romeo! Wherefore art thou Romeo?

Deny thy father and refuse thy name;

Or, if thou wilt not, be but sworn my love,

And I'll no longer be a Capulet.





óAct II, scene ii, lines 33-36 


It is irritating in the extreme that the first line of this passage, taken by itself, is so often treated in popular quotation as though Juliet were saying "Where are you, Romeo?" and were looking for him. Not only does it show a pitiful ignorance of the meaning of the archaic word "wherefore," but it rums a key point in the plot development. "Wherefore" means "why," and Juliet is asking the absent Romeo why he is a Montague. Oh, if only he weren't. 
All she can talk about is his name. She says: 


'Tis but thy name that is my enemy.

Thou art thyself, though [you were] not a Montague.

What's Montague? It is nor hand, nor foot,

Nor arm, nor face. O, be some other name

Belonging to a man.

What's in a name? That which we call a rose

By any other name would smell as sweet.





óAct II, scene ii, lines 38-44


What can Romeo be thinking as he hears this? We might speculate that left to himself he might have approached his father and urged him to talk to Capulet, under a flag of truce if necessary, and try to arrange a reconciliating marriage. It is so easy to feel that this would work. Who but Tybalt shows any signs of anything but weariness with the feud, and he could be beaten into submission. To be sure, marriage had been spoken of with Paris, but nothing had yet been committed. 
However, Romeo may well have recognized the romanticism of the young girl who feels the thrill of loving the family enemy; who loves the risk and danger and sadness of it; and perhaps he would not dream of throwing cold water on that feeling. So he makes himself known and dramatically denounces his name, saying: 


I take thee at thy word.

Call me but love, and I'll be new baptized;

Henceforth I never will be Romeo.





óAct II, scene ii, lines 49-51 


Thus he commits himself to the full gamut of romantic folderol as seen through the eyes of a dramatic fourteen-year-old, and the catastrophe is under way. 


Ö the place deathÖ




Juliet is astonished at Romeo's sudden presence and makes the most of it in terms of the romantic version of the feud. She berates Romeo for having taken chances, saying: 


The orchard walls are high and hard to climb,

And the place death, considering who thou art, //

any of my kinsmen find thee here.





óAct II, scene ii, lines 63-65 


Exaggeration, we might easily guess. To be sure, if Tybalt had made his appearance at this moment there would have been trouble. We can suspect, however, that if anyone but Tybalt had appeared, Romeo would have gotten away with nothing but some hard words. In fact, the subject of marriage might have been broached. 
Is it possible that even Juliet considered the feud and its consequences only as an afterthought? Her first fear was that he might have hurt himself falling off the wall. 
Romeo accepts Juliet's insistence on the danger of death, perhaps recognizing that it is part of his appeal to her and glad to take advantage of that. Still, he doesn't really seem to take it seriously, for he says:


Alack, there lies more peril in thine eye

Than twenty of their swords!





óAct II, scene ii, lines 71-72 


With all that done, the two get down to the serious business of expressing their love. 


Thy purpose marriage Ö




From words of love, they pass quickly to the thought of marriage. Juliet says: 


// that thy bent of love be honorable,

Thy purpose marriage, send me word tomorrow,

By one that I'll procure to come to thee,




óAct II, scene ii, lines 143-45 


If Romeo had had the rational plan of trying to work a marriage settlement in an aboveboard fashion to the advantage of everyone, he abandons it. If romantic little Juliet wants secret messages, and clandestine word, and even an exciting forbidden marriage-then she shall have them. 
The meeting comes to an end with Monday's dawn nearly upon the two. Romeo, thoroughly happy, says: 


Hence will I to my ghostly [spiritual] friar's close cell,

His help to crave and my dear hap [good luck] to tell.




óAct II, scene ii, lines 188-89 


With luck, the friar can arrange the secret marriage that Juliet longs for. 


Ö the powerful grace Ö




The scene shifts at once to the cell of Friar Laurence ("Fra Lorenzo" in Da Porto's version) early Monday morning. He is an alchemist as well as a friar and is gathering herbs in order to extract their juices for his experiments, saying: 


O, mickle [much] is the powerful grace that lies

In plants, herbs, stones, and their true qualities;

For naught so vile that on the earth doth live

But to the earth some special good doth give;




óAct II, scene iii, lines 15-18 


Here is expressed the medieval view that all creation is made for the express good of man; that everything on earth has some property that makes it valuable to man. 


Ö your households' rancor. ..




Romeo comes to the friar with his tale of love and Friar Laurence is more than a little confused at this sudden change from Rosaline to Juliet and clucks disapprovingly over the whole matter. He decides, however, to go along with the secret marriage for a clearly expressed reason; saying: 


In one respect I'll thy assistant be;

For this alliance may so happy prove

To turn your households' rancor to pure love.





óAct II, scene iii, lines 90-92 


Friar Laurence obviously considers the feud to be dying and a marital alliance, he judges, will end it altogether. He seems, however, to prefer the indirect and hidden approach to the direct one; he is as romantic as Juliet. 


Ö Prince of Cats. ..




It is broad day now and Benvolio and Mercutio have still not found Romeo. Meanwhile Tybalt, angered over the incident at the feast, has sent a formal challenge to Romeo. The two friends aren't worried, sure that Romeo can take care of himself. Mercutio thinks very little of Tybalt as a swordsman, characterizing him as 


More than Prince of Cats.

O, he's the courageous captain of compliments.

He fights as you sing pricksong-keeps time, distance, and proportionÖ





óAct II, scene iv, lines 19-22 


The "Prince of Cats" is a jeer at Tybalt's name, of course. The mockery is aimed at that favorite butt of Shakespeare's-the French or Italian way of doing things (in this case, scientific fencing) as opposed to the wholesome English fashion of simply dealing out good thwacks. 


Laura, to his lady Ö




And now at last Romeo appears, and Mercutio fully expects him to begin again with his whining lovesickness. He mimics him in advance:


Now is he for the numbers that

Petrarch flowed in. Laura, to his lady,

was a kitchen wenchÖ





óAct II, scene iv, lines 40-42 


Petrarch (Francesco Petrarca in Italian) was an Italian poet whose work may be thought of as sparking the Renaissance. He was born in 1304 and in 1327 met a lady known to us as "Laura." Who she was in actuality is not certain. 
Though he did much work in Latin, he is best known for his collection of Italian sonnets, odes, and other poems written between 1330 and 1360. These poems deal with his love for Laura, and through that love, deal with many other matters. Because of this, Petrarch and Laura are one of the great pairs of lovers of history, though the love may have been an ideal one only. 


Ö you ratcatcher Ö




But how things have changed! Romeo is no longer a mewling wretch, but is lively and sparkling, quite ready to engage Mercutio in a game of wits and to give as good as he gets, so that the latter is delighted that Romeo is himself again. 
The Nurse then comes on the scene. Mercutio is, with some difficulty, shoved offstage and Romeo tells her that all has been arranged for Friar Laurence to marry them that very afternoon. The Nurse goes off with the news and plans also to get Juliet a rope ladder that she can lower to Romeo that night, so that he might climb to her room and enjoy the fruits of love. 
We might imagine that on the next day, once Juliet has had her romantic marriage and all it involves, Romeo will confront his father with the fact, and old Montague will in turn confront the Capulets. All, we hope, will be well-if only Romeo can stay out of trouble till then. 
But it is still Monday afternoon, midsummer, and very hot. Tempers may be short and Benvolio (still promenading with Mercutio) feels it will be well to go in. With characteristic caution he wishes to avoid meeting an irritated Tybalt, brooding over the crashing of the party the night before. 
Mercutio refuses to take this seriously. 
At this point, however, in comes Tybalt, inquiring after Romeo. Mercutio baits hull while Benvolio anxiously tries to keep the whole matter under control. 
But now Romeo enters, already married to Juliet, although no one knows it but bride, groom, and friar. Tybalt challenges him with an insult and Romeo, aware of their present relationship, of which Tybalt is not, patiently endures the insult and refuses to fight. 
So far all is well. Romeo has done the sensible thing, even if it was not a particularly heroic one.
And now the secrecy, Juliet's romantic secrecy, does its fell work. If Mercutio had known of Romeo's marriage he would have understood and stood aside. He did not know and finds he cannot endure Romeo's tame acceptance of insult. If Romeo will accept the grace, Mercutio will wipe it out on his behalf. He cries out to Tybalt:


Tybalt, you ratcatcher, will you walk?





óAct III, scene i, line 76 


"Ratcatcher" is one more reference to Tybalt the cat, and Mercutio is inviting the other to walk to some quiet place where they may fight without interruption. 
Tybalt hesitates. His quarrel is not with Mercutio. He asks Mercutio what he wants and the latter says, lightly: 


Good King of Cats,

nothing but one of your nine lives,





óAct III, scene i, lines 78-79 


It is an old fable that a cat has nine lives, and there is something to it. A cat is careful, sly, equipped with needlelike claws for a fight and soft pads for stealth. It can climb a tree and land on its feet when it falls. It will escape sure death for other animals eight times out of nine.


Ö both your houses






All might still be well. Mercutio, we may well expect, is the better swordsman and will kill Tybalt. Mercutio is not a member of either faction and so is not included in the ban against street fighting. With Tybalt dead, the chief upholder of the feud will be gone. It will be all the easier to reconcile the factions.
All Romeo need do now is stand aside. 
But Romeo cannot. Mercutio is his loved friend, Tybalt his new relative. He wants neither hurt so he tries to get between and stop them. At which point, in one Sash, all goes wrong. Tybalt's sword passes under Romeo's arm and Mercutio is blocked from parrying. Badly wounded, Mercutio recognizes the fact that the quarrel was not really his, after all, and says so in a phrase that has entered the language: 


I am hurt.

A plague o' both your houses.





óAct III, scene i, lines 91-92 


Ö fortune's fool




Mercutio makes his last bitter jests and hobbles off to die. 
Yet still things are not utterly lost Romeo has lost a dear Mend but it was by no willing action of his own. He had tried for the best, endeavored to make peace. It was Tybalt who was the murderer and it is he who may be executed for it and again the feud will be made up the easier, perhaps, for Tybalt's end. 
Yet Romeo cannot leave it at that, not even for Juliet. Mercutio died in his quarrel and he has no choice. Wildly, he challenges Tybalt and kills him-and by then all the noise has roused the citizens. 
Romeo is half amazed at all that has happened in a matter of a few minutes, for now he must get out of the city at once or, by the Prince's decree, he will be executed. 
It is still less than twenty-four hours since he met Juliet and already he has not only gained her, but lost her as well. No wonder he cries out in agony: 


O, I am fortune's fool!





óAct III, scene i, line 138 


Yet a little chink of hope remains. When the Prince arrives, Benvolio tells the tale of what has happened with objective accuracy. Despite the clamors of the Capulet faction, the Prince believes Benvolio (and perhaps remembers that the dead Tybalt had killed his own kinsman) and does not place the death penalty on Romeo after all. He merely banishes him. 
While banishment seems bad enough under the circumstances, a sentence of banishment can be unsaid, while an execution is final. 


Ö Phoebus' lodgingÖ




Meanwhile, toward sunset, Juliet is waiting with unbearable impatience for the coming of night, of Romeo, of love. She says: 


Gallop apace, you fiery-footed steeds,

Toward Phoebus' lodging! Such a wagoner

As Phaeton would whip you to the west

And bring in cloudy night immediately.




óAct III, scene ii, lines 1-4 


The sun is pictured here in the fashion of the Greek myth, as a blazing chariot conducted by golden horses, traveling toward the west where they can move behind the horizon and rest till it is time for the next day's journey across the sky. The horizon is therefore Phoebus' (the god of the sun) place of lodging. Phaeton is the son of the sun god, whose ill-fated attempt to drive the horses of the sun chariot nearly led to disaster (see page II-297). 
But then in comes the Nurse with the rope ladder-and with news, as well, of Tybalt's death. 
Juliet is heartbroken, for she loved Tybalt. Her greater love for Romeo wins out, however, and she weeps over the rope ladder that was to have carried her husband to her, then goes to her room where she hopes to die. 
But that is more than the Nurse can bear. She can still help. She assures Juliet she knows where Romeo is hiding and will get him to come to his wife and comfort her. 


Ö pass to Mantua




Romeo, in Friar Laurence's cell, is completely broken. Overwhelmed with horror at the thought of banishment, he will not listen to the friar's consolation. Even when the Nurse comes, asking him to go to Juliet, he can think only of suicide. 
It is only with the greatest difficulty that the friar finally manages to make him understand that banishment is not necessarily the end, saying: 


Go get thee to thy love, as was decreed,

Ascend her chamber, hence and comfort her.

But look thou stay not till the watch be set,

For then thou canst not pass to Mantua,

Where thou shalt live till we can find a time

To blaze [announce] your marriage, reconcile your friends,

Beg pardon of the Prince, and call thee back




óAct III, scene iii, lines 146-52 


Mantua (see page I-454) is only twenty miles south of Verona, not really very far, though to Romeo it might well have seemed an infinite distance under the circumstances. 
The chink of hope remains, but oh, how different from what it would have been if Mercutio had not been ignorant of Romeo's marriage. 
For even that chink of hope to remain, however, time is needed as Friar Laurence says, and, alas, time disappears. 


Thursday let it beÖ




Old Capulet is perturbed at Juliet's misery and attributes it entirely to the death of Tybalt. He says to Paris:


Look you, she loved her kinsman Tybalt dearly,




óAct III, scene iv, line 3 


Yes indeed, and this is the best evidence we have that she may well have picked up her fatal notions of the feud from him. 
Thinking to console his daughter, Capulet decides to let her marry Paris at once after all. He asks the day and Paris says: 


Monday, my lord.




óAct III, scene iv, line 18 


This fixes the time sequence for all the play. Capulet considers that and says: 


Monday! Ha, ha! Well, Wednesday is too soon.

A [on] Thursday let it be Ö




óAct III, scene iv, lines 19-20 


He doesn't know that Juliet is already married, of course. 


No warmth, no breath Ö




Unsuspecting this new gruesome development, Juliet receives Romeo late Monday night. The night after their meeting and their great balcony scene, they spend in connubial love. At dawn on Tuesday they must separate and Romeo gets out of town safely. 
But then Juliet learns of her prospective marriage to Paris and of course refuses firmly. Old Capulet promptly flies into a passion and makes it plain that she will marry Paris whether she wishes to or not. 
Juliet can find no one to help her. Capulet threatens to disown her. Lady Capulet turns away. Even the Nurse, in desperation, can only advise Juliet to marry Paris and commit bigamy. 
Juliet can think of no alternative but to fly to Friar Laurence. 
At this point the friar might have shown courage. He might have gone to the Capulets with the truth and endeavored to protect himself and Juliet with his priestly robes. Under the circumstances, there would have been great risk, but there were no reasonable alternatives. 
Friar Laurence turns to an unreasonable one. As romantic as Juliet, he tries a complicated plan of indirection. He gives Juliet a mysterious drug he has prepared himself. He tells her to take it the night of the next day (Wednesday) and it will put her into a cataleptic trance. He says:


Ö no pulse






Shall keep his native progress, but surcease;

No warmth, no breath, shall testify thou livest;




óAct IV, scene i, lines 96-98 


This trance will last forty-two hours, that is, through Thursday and Friday. The Capulets, thinking she is dead, will place her in the family tomb. Romeo will be there by Friday night, and when she wakes he will carry her off to Mantua. 
This drug is, of course, an element of fantasy, for no drug is known (even today) that can safely counterfeit death so accurately over so long a time. 


Ö mandrakes torn out of the earth




For the first time in the play, there is a sizable gap in time. Some thirty-six hours are skipped over and it is Wednesday night. Juliet suddenly submits to her father's plans (to his relief and pleasure) and has now prepared herself, supposedly, for a wedding the next morning. She sends out the Nurse so that she may sleep alone, and as she prepares to take the friar's drug, she is beset with quite understandable fears. 
What if it kills her? Or, worse still, what if it wears off too soon and she comes to in the tomb before Romeo is there to claim her? What if she is surrounded by the effluvium of death, the gibbering of ghosts, and, in general, by 


Ö loathsome smells,

And shrieks like mandrakes torn out of the earth,

That living mortals, hearing them, run mad-





óAct IV, scene iii, lines 46-48 


The mandrake is a herb with a large, fleshy root that is usually forked in such proportions as to give it a resemblance to a partly formed man. About this fancied resemblance a number of superstitions arose. 
Since the root looked like a man it would, supposedly, help in the formation of one, and mandrakes were therefore thought to have the ability to make women fecund. This superstition (a worthless one, of course) is sanctioned by the Bible, where Jacob's second wife, Rachel, who is barren, begs for the mandrakes gathered by the son of his first wife, her sister Leah (Genesis 30:14). 
It was also thought that because mandrakes looked like little men they ought to share some of the qualities of men-feel pain, for instance, and cry out if wounded. From this arose the tale that if a mandrake were uprooted, it would emit a bloodcurdling shriek-so horrible a shriek as to madden or even kill those who heard it. 
Since mandrakes were desired for the ability to increase fecundity, and for other valuable properties assigned to them, it was necessary to pull them up anyway. What was sometimes done was to tie the top of the herb to a dog. From a distance, stones could be thrown at the dog, and in running away, he would pull out the mandrake, which could then be reclaimed. 


Ö the infectious pestilence. ..




The first part of Friar Laurence's plan works well. Juliet does take the potion and falls into a cataleptic trance. In the midst of the preparations for the wedding on Thursday morning, the Nurse finds her apparently dead. Juliet is carried to the tomb with heartbreaking lamentation. 
But there is another part of the plan. Romeo must be informed of all this and be ready to return to carry off Juliet on Friday. To carry this message to Romeo, Friar Laurence has sent off a friend, Friar John. 
Romeo gets a message indeed, but it is from a servant of his who comes spurring hard from Verona with the tale that Juliet is dead and entombed. Romeo, stricken, has no thought but to reach Juliet's corpse and kill himself there. For the purpose he buys poison. 
As for Friar John, however, he fails to reach Romeo. Before leaving he had sought the company of another friar, who had been visiting the sick, and both fell in with "searchers," that is, health officers, seeking to prevent spread of infection. 
Friar John tells Friar Laurence that: 


Ö the searchers of the town,

Suspecting that we both were in a house

Where the infectious pestilence did reign,

Sealed up the doors, and would not let us forth,





óAct V, scene ii, lines 8-11 


He could neither leave town nor send the message. Friar Laurence, thunderstruck, now realizes he must hasten to the tomb so that Juliet will not waken alone and so that he can explain matters. Meanwhile, he sends another message. 
The care of the "searchers" and their assiduity in applying quarantine is easily understood. In 1347 an "infectious pestilence" reached Europe. This was the infamous Black Death, the most frightening epidemic in world history. It is supposed to have killed some twenty-five million people in Europe in the space of three years, and quarantine was the only counter-measure the frightened continent knew.


Saint FrancisÖ




On Friday all converge on the tomb. Paris arrives first to grieve over his lost bride. Then comes Romeo, intent on suicide. They fight and Paris is killed. Romeo then lays himself down next to Juliet, takes the poison, and dies. It is less than five days since he first laid eyes on his tragic love. 
Only then does Friar Laurence finally come-a few minutes too late to prevent this further development of the catastrophe. He comes in muttering: 


Saint Francis be my speed [help]!





óAct V, scene iii, line 121 


St. Francis (Giovanni Francesco Bernardone) was born in Assisi in 1182, and after the usual life of a gay, but not particularly immoral, young man of the upper classes, he experienced a conversion to a saintly life. About 1202 he began to embrace a life of poverty and gathered disciples about him who were dedicated to preaching humbly and making their way through life by reliance on free-will offerings of the pious. This was the beginning of the Franciscan order. Presumably Friar Laurence belonged to it. 


Ö kill your joys with love




Friar Laurence finds Paris and Romeo both dead, and even as he tries to absorb this, Juliet wakes. The friar tries to persuade her to come with him so that he might bestow her in a nunnery, but with Romeo dead, she does not want to live and will not budge. The friar thinks he hears a noise and has one last chance at a boldness that might save the last pitiful remnant-Juliet's life. He misses that, too, and flees in fear of being discovered. 
Left alone, Juliet kills herself with Romeo's dagger. 
The watch, drawn by all the disturbance, now gathers, and so does the town: Montague, Capulet, the Prince. Little by little, the whole story comes out and the Prince sorrowfully states the moral: 


Where be these enemies? Capulet, Montague,

See what a scourge is laid upon your hate,

That heaven finds means to kill your joys with love.

And I, for winking at your discords too,

Have lost a brace of kinsmen. All are punished.





óAct V, scene iii, lines 291-95 


The mutual grief ends the feud; as it might, so easily, have ended days earlier in mutual joy. 








18. The Merchant Of Venice


The merchant of venice, written in 1596 or 1597, lays its scene in what is surely one of the most remarkable cities in history. It is a city which at its peak was richer and more powerful than almost any full-sized nation of its time. It was queen of the sea and a barrier against the formidable Turks. 
This city, Venice, which was like an Italian Athens born after its time, or an Italian Amsterdam born before, had its birth at the time of the invasion of Italy by Attila the Hun in 452. Fleeing Italians hid in the lagoons offshore along the northern Adriatic and about this colony as the nucleus Venice arose. 
While the Franks, the Byzantines, the Lombards, and the papacy all struggled for control over Italy, Venice, under skillful leadership, managed to gain for itself a steadily increasing independence and, through trade, a steadily increasing prosperity. 
Venetian prosperity and power climbed steeply during the period of the Crusades, since it, along with several other Italian cities, had the ships to carry the Crusaders and their supplies-and charged healthily for it. By 1203 Venice could blackmail a group of Crusaders into attacking the Byzantine Empire first. In 1204 the Crusaders took Constantinople itself and the Byzantine Empire was divided as loot, with a considerable share going to Venice, which thus became a major Mediterranean power. 
Venice embarked on a long struggle with Genoa, a port on the other side of the Italian boot, and by 1380 had won completely. The war made her aware of her need for continental territories to assure herself of food supr plies despite the ups and downs of naval warfare. She spread out into nearby Italy and by 1420 northeastern Italy was hers from the Adriatic nearly to Lake Como. 
The fifteenth century, however, saw her pass her peak. The Turk captured Constantinople in 1453 and it became less easy to trade with the East The Portuguese explorers circled Africa by 1497 and, as it grew possible to bypass the Mediterranean, the Venetian stranglehold on trade with the East further diminished. 
Then, ha the sixteenth century, France, Spain, and the Empire began to use Italy as a battleground and the entire peninsula, including Venice, was reduced to misery. 
But even in Shakespeare's time, although Venice was no longer what she had been, she remained a romantic land, with the trappings of empire still about herself-an efficient, stable, and long-established government over wealthy merchants and skillful seamen with territory and bases here and there in the Mediterranean. What's more, Shakespeare's century saw Venice reach its artistic heights. Titian and Tintoretto were sixteenth-century Venetians, for instance. 
Then too, even in decline, Venice remained Europe's shield against the Turks throughout Shakespeare's lifetime and for several decades after his death. 


Ö why I am so sad




The play opens with Antonio on stage. He is the "merchant" of the title and he is in conversation with two friends, Salerio and Solanio. Antonio says: 


In sooth I know not why I am so sad.

It wearies me, you say it wearies you;




óAct I, scene i, lines 1-2 


The sadness is never explicitly explained in the play and it may be accepted as simply setting a mood. Antonio, after all, is to spend much of the play in a position of great danger. 
However, it is possible to speculate that there is a more specific cause of sadness, one which Shakespeare does not care to elaborate upon. As will appear soon enough, Antonio has a male friend to whom he is devoted with a self-sacrificial intensity that is almost unbelievable. This friend, we are soon to find out, is about to woo a young lady in the hope of marrying her. 
Antonio may very easily be meant by Shakespeare to represent the nobility of homosexual love, something he hints at in several plays (as, for instance, in The Two Gentlemen of Verona, see page I-473) without quite daring to be specific about it. 
Well then, if Antonio's friend has, in the eagerness of his new plans involving a lady, grown more distant, is not this reason enough for the poor man to be sad-and yet be unable to explain it, without disgrace, to his friends?


Ö your argosiesÖ




His friends, however, have a more prosaic explanation. Salerio suggests that he is nervous over the state of his business affairs, saying: 


Your mind is tossing on the ocean,

There where your argosies with portly sail-




óAct I, scene i, lines 8-9 


The word "argosies" harks back to a city founded on the eastern shore of the Adriatic in the seventh century by refugees, as Venice had similarly been founded two centuries earlier. In this case, the founders were Greeks who were being pushed out of the interior by invading Slavs. The new city was named Ragusium, better known to us in the Italian version of the name, Ragusa. 
Ragusa was, for a time, a flourishing trading city, much like Venice itself, or like Genoa and Pisa. Ragusa was particularly known for its large merchant ships, which were called ragusea. In English the first two letters were transposed and the word became "argosy." 
It is clear from these opening exchanges, then, that Antonio is an extremely wealthy merchant, but one whose business involves extreme risk. Antonio, however, pooh-poohs the chances of these risks coming to pass. 


Ö two-headed Janus




But if Antonio is not worried about business and is merely irrationally sad, then, says Solanio with a touch of impatience, he might just as well be irrationally merry. Solanio says: 


Ö Now by two-headed Janus,

Nature hath framed strange fellows in her time:

Some that will evermore peep through their eyes

And laugh like parrots at a bagpiper,

And other of such vinegar aspect

That they'll not show their teeth in way of smile

Though Nestor swear the jest be laughable.





óAct I, scene i, lines 50-56 


In other words, some people are, by simple temperament, happy; others sad. 
As for Janus, he is the most familiar of the purely Roman (that is, non-Greek) gods. He was the god of doorways and therefore the god of going in and going out. (The word "janitor" is derived from his name.) It is an easy extension from that to seeing in him the god of beginnings and endings, of comings and goings (and January, the beginning of the year, is named in his honor.) 
In the Roman forum Janus was honored with a temple whose gates were open in time of war and closed in time of peace. Rome's military history was such that for seven centuries they were hardly ever closed. 
Though on Roman representations he is shown with two identical faces in opposite directions, it is possible to improve on that. Since he is the god of beginnings and endings, he might be imagined to have one face turned toward the past and the other toward the future. 
It could easily be imagined that the past-viewing face was cheerful, since the pains of the past were over, while the forward-viewing face was sad, since there was uncertainty as to what the pains of the future might be-hence the figure of speech in Solanio's statement. 


Ö let my liver rather heat.. .




Three other friends of Antonio enter: Bassanio, Gratiano, and Lorenzo, while Salerio and Solanio leave. 
Gratiano also notes Antonio's sadness and he too advocates merriment for its own sake. He says to Antonio: 


Let me play the fool!

With mirth and laughter let old wrinkles come,

And let my liver rather heat with wine

Than my heart cool with mortifying groans.




óAct I, scene i, lines 79-82 


The link between liver and wine might seem at first blush to indicate that Shakespeare had a prescient knowledge of the connection physicians would eventually draw between cirrhosis of the liver and alcoholism. 
Nothing of the sort. The liver is the largest gland in the body, weighing three or four pounds in man and being correspondingly large in other mammals. It is easy to equate size and importance and to argue that the liver is so large because it has a peculiarly important function and must therefore serve as the seat of life and of the emotions. (The similarity between "liver" and "live" is not accidental.) 
Contributing to this also is the fact that ancient priests, looking for prognostications of things to come, would often study the liver of animals sacrificed to the gods. This is natural, since the liver is so large and varies so in detail from animal to animal that it is particularly easy to study. Yet it is not the ease that can be advanced as a reason, so special importance must be insisted upon instead.


In Belmont Ö




It is Bassanio with whom Antonio is in love and the strength of the lat-ter's affection is quickly shown. Bassanio has been living beyond his means and is deeply in debt. He has been forced to borrow and says, frankly: 


Ö To you, Antonio,

I owe the most in money and in love,





óAct I, scene i, lines 130-31 


But Antonio is willing to continue the support. He says earnestly to Bassanio: 


Ö be assured

My purse, my person, my extremest means

Lie all unlocked to your occasions [needs].





óAct I, scene i, lines 137-39 


Surely the attachment on Antonio's side can only be love in its fullest sense. Yet it may be one-sided. Bassanio's affection may be nothing more than friendship, for he seems to have no hesitation in attempting to draw on Antonio's support for a competing love. 
Bassanio explains that he may be in a position to repay all he has borrowed if only Antonio will be willing to invest a bit more. He says: 


In Belmont is a lady richly left;





óAct I, scene i, line 161 


In short, Bassanio knows of a rich heiress and if he can marry her, he can pay off all his debts. All he needs is enough money to appear a respectable suitor; he cannot go as a beggar. 
(The beginning of Bassanio's speech makes him sound like a fortune hunter, but the play will amply show that he wants the woman for herself and that the money is secondary. He stresses the money now because he wants to explain that he will be able to pay off his debt to Antonio, and not that he is greedy for wealth for himself.) 
As for Belmont, that may well be a fictitious name for the estate left to the heiress. In the Italian tale from which this portion of the plot is derived, the place is Belmonte, and there is a Belmonte in Italy, on the western shore of the Italian toe, a little over five hundred miles south of Venice. Probably there is no connection, and as far as the play is concerned, it doesn't matter where Belmont is, but it is interesting that a Belmonte exists.


Her name is Portia.. .




Bassanio has seen the lady and knows her to be beautiful and virtuous. He says: 


Her name is Portia, nothing undervalued

To Cato's daughter, Brutus' Portia;





óAct I, scene i, lines 165-66 


Brutus' Portia-that is, his wife-appears as a pattern of Roman virtue in Julius Caesar (see page I-281), a play Shakespeare wrote some two years after The Merchant of Venice. 


Ö Calchos' strand




Bassanio goes on in his lyrical praise of Portia to say: 


Ö her sunny locks

Hang on her temples like a golden fleece,

Which makes her seat of Belmont Colchos' strond,

And many Jasons come in quest of her.





óAct I, scene i, lines 169-72 


The tale of the Golden Fleece is one of the most famous in Greek mythology. Two children, the son and daughter of a king of Thebes, had a wicked stepmother. With the help of the gods they were whisked away from Thebes on the back of a winged ram with a golden fleece (see page I-541). The ram flew them to what must have seemed the end of the world to the very early Greeks-the easternmost shore of the Black Sea. 
On the way, the girl, Helle, fell off and drowned in one of the narrow waterways between the Aegean and the Black seas, a waterway known as the "Hellespont" in consequence. The boy, however, was carried safely to the kingdom of Colchis (called Colchos in this Shakespearean passage). The King of Colchis, Aeetes, sacrificed the ram and suspended the Golden Fleece from a tree, leaving it under the guard of a never sleeping dragon. 
To attain that Golden Fleece and bring it back to Greece was a worthy aim for an adventurer, and Jason, an exiled Thessalian prince, undertook the quest. With a fifty-oared ship, the Argo, and a crew of heroes, he penetrated the Black Sea and won the Fleece.


Ö the County Palatine




When Bassanio is done explaining, Antonio promptly offers to finance the project in a characteristic burst of selflessness. With that done the scene shifts at once to Belmont, where we meet Portia and her companion, Nerissa. 
It seems that Portia's father, in dying, has left three caskets behind, one of gold, one of silver, and one of lead. Each suitor must choose one of the caskets, and only he who picks the correct casket, the one with Portia's portrait inside, can marry her. If the suitor loses, he must swear to leave at once and never to reveal which casket he had chosen. 
There are many suitors come to take their chances and Portia has an opportunity to display her mocking wit at their expense (and Shakespeare has a chance to air his prejudices). 
Nerissa mentions a prince of Naples first and he is dismissed by Portia at once as interested only in horses and horsemanship. Nerissa then says: 


Then is there the County Palatine.





óAct I, scene ii, line 44 


In the early Middle Ages a "count palatine" was a high official who served in the King's household; that is, in the palace. Eventually, the title came to be inherited only as a tide and without any special house-holdly duties. 
In only one case did the title remain prominent, and that was hi connection with a tract of land along the middle Rhine River whose ruler remained the Count Palatine. The territory was therefore known as the "Palatinate." Its capital was at Heidelberg. 
In Shakespeare's time the Palatinate was a center of German Calvinism, a form of religion which was similar to English Puritanism. In 1592, just a few years before The Merchant of Venice was written, Frederick IV succeeded to the title. He was a sincere Calvinist (he was called "Frederick the Upright"), which meant he was grave and solemn to a degree. 
It was perhaps with that in mind that Shakespeare has Portia say with respect to him: 


He hears merry tales and smiles not;

I fear he will prove the weeping philosopher

when he grows old, being so full of unmannerly

sadness in his youth.





óAct I, scene ii, lines 46-49 


There was a "weeping philosopher"; he was Heraclitus of Ephesus, who lived about 500 B.C. and whose gloomy view of life caused him to weep over the follies of mankind. (There was also a "laughing philosopher," Democritus of Abdera, who lived about 400 b.c. and whose cheerful disposition enabled him to laugh over the follies of mankind.) 


Ö every man in no man.. .




A reference to a French suitor has Portia say: 


Why, he hath a horse better than the Neapolitan's,

a better bad habit of frowning than the Count Palatine;

he is every man in no man. If a throstle sing,

he jails straight a-cap'ring;





óAct I, scene ii, lines 57-60 


This is, in part, the old stereotype of the Frenchman-a frivolous person without strong convictions who takes on the coloring of his surroundings. In this case, Shakespeare may even have a specific case in mind. 
In 1593, just three years before The Merchant of Venice was written, the French Protestant leader Henry of Navarre (pictured so favorably in Love's Labor's Lost, see page I-423) accepted Catholicism to establish himself as King Henry IV. To English Protestants this was a perfect case of French lack of principle. 


Ö his behavior everywhere




An English suitor does not escape Portia's sharp tongue either. Concerning him, she says: 


How oddly he is suited [outfitted]!

1 think he bought his doublet in Italy,

his round hose in France, his bonnet in Germany,

and his behavior everywhere.





óAct I, scene ii, lines 72-75 


This is the old complaint of the conservative nationalistic Englishman (of whom Shakespeare is so often a spokesman) that the younger generation is mad for foreign novelties and has nothing but contempt for the traditions of their own land. (This view is not confined to England or to the sixteenth century.) 


Ö borrowed a box of the earÖ




The mention of a Scotsman brings forth an expression of contempt from Portia, who says:


Ö he hath a neighborly charity in him,

for he borrowed a box of the ear of the Englishman

and swore he would pay him again when he was able.

I think the Frenchman became his surety.. .





óAct I, scene ii, lines 78-81 


Scotland was, like France, one of England's traditional enemies. Since Scotland was much weaker than France it was regularly beaten, so that Shakespeare can indulge in a rather cheap vaunt over an enemy that was often defeated but never accepted defeat. 
As a matter of fact, the sixteenth century saw England inflict two disastrous boxes of the ear upon Scotland. In 1513 England defeated Scotland in the Battle of Flodden Field (see page II-746), and then again, in 1542, at the Battle of Solway Moss. 
Shakespeare's reference to the Frenchman becoming the Scotsman's surety refers to the traditional friendship between France and Scotland. France was always ready to support Scotland financially in her wars against England, but was never able to support her by direct military force. 
Then Nerissa asks about another: 


How like you the young German,

the Duke of Saxony's nephew?





óAct I, scene ii, lines 83-84 


To which Portia replies: 


Very vilely in the morning when he is sober,

and most vilely in the afternoon when he is drunk.





óAct I, scene ii, lines 85-86 


This was no more than a matter of making fun of the proverbial German habit of drunkenness, but Shakespeare hit closer than he knew. The Elector of Saxony (a title unique to Germany, which Shakespeare converts into the more familiar "duke") had, at the time The Merchant of Venice was written, a younger brother who was then about twelve years old, and who grew up to be a notorious drunkard.


Ö as old as Sibylla. ..




However, none of these suitors will even try the casket test. They are there only to serve as butts for Portia's jokes, and now Nerissa reports they are leaving. Portia is relieved, but she insists she will marry only in accordance with the casket test just the same: 


// / live to be as old as Sibylla,

I will die as chaste as Diana unless

I be obtained by the manner of my father's will.





óAct I, scene ii, lines 105-7 


Sibylla's age was proverbial (see page I-452) and Shakespeare makes use of that in several plays. 


Ö the Marquis of Montferrat




But now we get down to business. Nerissa asks: 


Do you not remember, lady, in your father's time,

a Venetian, a scholar and a soldier, that came hither

in company of the Marquis of Montferrat?





óAct I, scene ii, lines 111-13 


The marquisate of Montferrat was an independent state in Shakespeare's time located just north of Genoa. In 1587 Vicenzo I became marquis. His immediate predecessors had been enlightened rulers who had patronized art and literature and were therefore looked upon with great favor by artists and writers. Vicenzo himself helped deliver the great poet Torquato Tasso from the insane asylum to which he had been sent as a result of his paranoid mania. 
Nevertheless, Vicenzo was a most extravagant and wasteful ruler, and at the time The Merchant of Venice was written, these proclivities of his were quite clear. If Bassanio was his friend and had been forced to keep up with him, no wonder he managed to go through so much of Antonio's fortune. 
It was undoubtedly on this earlier visit that Bassanio had seen Portia and discovered her beauty and virtue. She had not been unaffected either, for on the mere mention of him she grows excited. But new suitors are coming and the scene reaches its end.


Three thousand ducats. ..




Back in Venice, there is the problem of financing Bassanio. Antonio's ready cash is tied up in his merchant vessels, so the young man must borrow the actual money elsewhere. Antonio, however, is willing to act as guarantor of the loan. (Otherwise, Bassanio would lack the credit to borrow anything at all.) 
The third scene of the play opens, then, with Bassanio in conversation with a prospective source of money. The man of whom the loan is being requested says musingly (for it is a large sum): 


Three thousand ducats-well.





óAct I, scene iii, line 1 


In the Middle Ages there were few regions with a sufficiently reliable supply of silver to issue good coins. Venice was one of the exceptions. Her rich trade brought precious metals to her gates and it paid her to use them in producing good coins of full weight and honest value. The reputation of Venice lay behind the coins and merchants from all over Europe and the Mediterranean lands were anxious to accept those coins-which was to the benefit of Venetian trade. 
These coins were put out by the Duchy of Venice, a state which in the Italian language was the "Ducato di Venezia," so that the coins were called ducati or, in English, "ducats." Good coins, also called ducats, were put out by the Duchy of Apulia in southern Italy. 
In either case, three thousand ducats was a huge sum for the tune. Bassanio was not skimping. 
The person to whom Bassanio is talking is not an ordinary Venetian. We can picture him (and he is usually presented on the stage) as a tall man with a beak of a nose, a long black beard, curly sideburns, a skull cap, and a long black coat. He is, in short, a Jew, and his name is Shylock. 
Shylock is not a Jewish name; there was never a Jew named Shylock that anyone has heard of; the name is an invention of Shakespeare's which has entered the common language (because of the power of the characterization of the man) to represent any grasping, greedy, hard-hearted creditor. I have heard Jews themselves use the word with exactly this meaning, referring back to Shakespeare's character. 
Where did Shakespeare get the name? There is a Hebrew word shalakh, which appears twice in the Bible (Leviticus 11:17 and Deuteronomy 14:17). In both places, birds of prey are being listed as unfit articles of diet for Jews. No one knows exactly what bird is meant by shalakh, but the usual translation into English gives it as "cormorant." 
The cormorant is a sea bird which eats fish so voraciously that the word has come to mean personified greed and voraciousness. Shakespeare apparently is using a form of the Hebrew word both as name and characterization of the Jewish moneylender. 


Ö upon the RialtoÖ




Shylock hesitates. The loan is a large one but Antonio, who is being offered as surety, has a good reputation for honest business dealing and is known to be wealthy enough to cover the sum. And still Shylock hesitates, for Antonio's ventures are thinly spread and he is at the moment in a period of unusual risk. Shylock says of Antonio: 


Ö he hath an argosy bound to Tripolis, another to the Indies;

I understand, moreover, upon the Rialto, he hath a third at Mexico,

a fourth for England-and other ventures he hath, squandered abroad.





óAct I, scene iii, lines 17-21 


Of the places listed by Shylock, the least familiar is Tripolis. This word means "three cities" in Greek and any city built up out of the union of three towns is liable to be given that name. As an example there is one in northern Africa, which is better known to us by the Italian version of the name, Tripoli. It is the capital of the modern kingdom of Libya. 
There is also a second Tripolis on the eastern shore of the Mediterranean, in what is now Lebanon. It is the second largest city of that nation nowadays, and is better known to the west as Tripoli. Its Arabic name is Tarabulus. 
Which Tripoli Antonio's argosy was bound for, whether the one on the southern or the eastern shore of the Mediterranean, we have no way of telling. 
Shylock heard his news "upon the Rialto," a phrase that needed no explanation for the audience of the play. 
In 1590, some seven years before The Merchant of Venice was written, the Venetians built a magnificent marble bridge across the Grand Canal, their chief waterway. The Latin rivus altus means "deep stream," and a bridge crossing the stream would very likely adopt its name. The Italian version of the phrase is "Rialto." 
The Rialto bridge was lined with a row of shops on either side and with a broad footpath between. It became a busy commercial center and Venetian merchants and traders would gather there to exchange news and gossip.


Ö your prophet the Nazarite Ö




Despite his misgivings, Shylock thinks Antonio is good surety for the loan. Bassanio, eager to help Shylock come to a favorable decision, invites him to dinner, and Shylock draws back at once: 


Yes, to smell pork, to eat of the habitation

which your prophet the Nazarite conjured

the devil into!





óAct I, scene iii, lines 31-33 


So far the exchange between Bassanio and Shylock has indicated nothing of the religious difference; it might have been any two men discussing a business deal. But now, with the mention of eating, comes the first clear stamp of Jewishness upon Shylock. He won't eat pork! 
The Jewish abhorrence of pork is based on biblical statutes. The eleventh chapter of the Book of Leviticus states that only those beasts that have a cloven hoof and that chew the cud are ritually clean and may be eaten and sacrificed. As one example of a beast that is not ritually clean, the seventh and eighth verses say: "And the swine, though he divide the hoof, and be cloven-footed, yet he cheweth not the cud; he is unclean to you. Of their flesh shall ye not eat, and their carcase shall ye not touch." 
Many other creatures are listed as unclean in the chapter; such as the camel, the hare, the owl, the cormorant, the shellfish, and so on. 
It is the pig, though, that stands out. Most of the other creatures forbidden to Jews were not a customary part of the diet of Gentiles either. Pork, on the other hand, was a favored dish of Gentiles, and for Jews to have so extreme an abhorrence of it seemed most peculiar. 
It became a hallmark of the difference between Jew and Gentile. When Antiochus IV of the Seleucid Empire tried to eradicate Judaism in the second century b.c., he insisted that Jews eat pork as the best way of indicating they had abandoned their religion (and a number of Jews suffered martyrdom rather than comply). In medieval Europe too the value of a conversion from Judaism was judged by the eagerness with which the erstwhile Jew ate pork. 
Shylock, in his comment on pork, does not, however, refer to the Old Testament prohibition. The Elizabethan audience would not have been familiar with that. The dietary laws of the Mosaic Code had, in the Christian view, been superseded through a vision St. Peter had had (as is described in Chapter 10 of the Book of Acts) and the Leviticus chapter was therefore a dead letter. 
Instead, Shylock is made to express his disgust by means of a reference to the New Testament. The reference is to a wonder tale concerning Jesus which describes how at one time he evicted many devils from a man possessed and sent them into a herd of swine. The version in Matthew states (8:32) that the devils "went into the herd of swine and, behold, the whole herd of swine ran violently down a steep place into the sea, and perished in the waters." 
Presumably, Shylock scorns pork as evil-haunted, and feels swine to be a fit habitation for demons and therefore most unfit food for men. And, of course, we might also view the passage as a mocking reference by Shy-lock to the kind of childish and superstitious tales (in his view) that made up the Christian religion. 
In actual fact, a Jew of the time would have been careful to avoid mocking at Christianity or to refer sneeringly to "your prophet the Nazarite," out of consideration for his own safety in a hostile world. Shakespeare, however, was intent on constructing a villain, and how better to do so than to have him sneer at what the audience held sacred. 
It is also important to remember that neither Shakespeare nor his audience had any firsthand knowledge of how Jews talked or acted anyway. The Jews had been driven out of England by Edward I in 1290, and save for a few special exceptions, they were still absent from the land in Shakespeare's time. They were not allowed to return, in fact, until the time of Oliver Cromwell, forty years after Shakespeare's death. 


Ö a fawning publican. ..




Now Antonio enters and Shylock views him with instant hate. He says, aside: 


How like a fawning publican he looks.

I hate him for he is a Christian;





óAct I, scene iii, lines 38-39 


The word "publican" occurs on a number of occasions in the New Testament, where it is used for those who collected taxes on behalf of the Roman masters of Judea. A tax collector is never popular and one who collects on behalf of an occupying power is doubly damned. "Publican" was therefore a term of opprobrium among the Jews of Roman times. The word is frequently coupled with "sinners," so that when the Pharisees wished to express their disapproval of Jesus, they pointed out that he ate "with publicans and sinners" (as in Matthew 9:11, for instance). 
Certainly Antonio cannot possibly be considered a publican and it is very likely that an actual Jew would not so glibly have used a term that does not occur in the Old Testament. But Shakespeare's audience knew "publican" as a word associated with the only Jews they really knew, those spoken of in the New Testament, and as a word of opprobrium besides.
Thus, the very use of the word, whether sensible or not, indicated Shy-lock's Jewishness, and that is what Shakespeare wanted it to do. 
Shylock's next remark about hating Christians further emphasizes his unrelieved villainy to a good Christian audience. They are not likely to reflect that the Jews of Shakespeare's time had little to associate with their Christian neighbors but abuse, blows, and worse and could scarcely be expected to love them for it. (As Israel Zangwill, the English-Jewish writer, is supposed to have said with sardonic bitterness in the last years of the nineteenth century: "The Jews are a frightened people. Nineteen centuries of Christian love have broken down their nerves.") 
And yet the Christians were but victims of their training too. Each Christian knew of Jews from the New Testament tales that were repeated in church week in and week out. The Jews had rejected Jesus and demanded the crucifixion. The Jews had opposed and persecuted the apostles. In the time of the Crusades, tales arose that Jews poisoned wells and sacrificed Christian children as part of the celebration of the Passover. 
Furthermore, added to all these abstractions, there was in England a contemporary case of an actual Jew of alleged enormous villainy. Queen Elizabeth I had had as her personal physician one Roderigo Lopez. He first accepted the post in 1586. 
Lopez was of Portuguese origin, which made him a foreigner, and he had once been a Jew, which made him worse than a foreigner. To be sure, he was converted to Christianity, but born Christians generally suspected the sincerity of a Jew's conversion. 
In 1594 Lopez came under suspicion of trying to poison the Queen in return for Spanish bribes. It is the modern opinion that he was innocent, and certainly Queen Elizabeth seemed to believe he was innocent. The Earl of Essex (of whom Shakespeare was a devoted follower) held a strong belief in Lopez' guilt and forced a trial. A Portuguese ex-Jew could scarcely expect a very objective or fair trial, and Lopez was convicted and then executed before a huge crowd under conditions of utmost brutality. 
The execution made the whole question of Jewish villainy very topical, and a play entitled The Jew of Malta was promptly revived. This play, first produced in 1589, had been written by Christopher Marlowe (who had died in 1593) and dealt with the flamboyant and monstrous villainy of a Jew. The revival was enormously successful. 
Shakespeare, who always had his finger on the popular pulse, and who was nothing if not a "commercial" writer, at once realized the value of writing a play of his own about a villainous Jew, and The Merchant of Venice was the result.


The rate of usance Ö




But Shakespeare is Shakespeare; he cannot make his Jew a simple straw man of unreasoning villainy. Shylock must have rational motives, and he says, in further explanation of his hatred of Antonio: 


He lends out money gratis, and brings down

The rate of usance here with us in Venice.





óAct I, scene iii, lines 41-42 


"Usance" represents the "use" of money, and closely allied to it is the word "usury." In early times money was usually lent as a gesture of friendship or charity, to relieve distress; and it would seem a most ignoble act to take back more than was lent. To charge "usance" (or "interest") was strongly condemned by the ethical teachings of Judaism. In Exodus 22:25 God is described as saying: "If thou lend money to any of my people that is poor by thee, thou shalt not be to him as an usurer, neither shalt thou lay upon him usury." 
In a more complicated society, however, money is lent not necessarily to friends, but to strangers; and not to those who are in personal need, but to those who need ready money to begin a course of action that will eventually (it is hoped) lead to profit The money is hired for business purposes and the hire should be paid for. Naturally the rate of payment should be greater if the risk of loss is greater. 
The medieval church did not distinguish between lending out of charity and lending out of business need, and interest on both were alike forbidden. 
The Jews, however, might interpret the Exodus verse as applying to "my people" (i.e., Jews) only. Lending at interest to non-Jews would therefore be permissible. Furthermore, Jews in Christian countries found themselves locked out of one type of employment after another, until very little was left them but the profession of moneylending, which was (in theory) forbidden to Christians. 
Thus was set up the sort of vicious cycle that is constantly used to plague minorities of any land. Jews were forced into becoming usurers and then the fact that they were usurers was used to prove how villainous and hateful they were. 
To make matters still more ironical, Christians were by no means as virtuous in the matter as theory had it. The church's strictures could not stand up against economic needs. Christian usurers arose in northern Italy to the point where the term "Lombard" (see page I-447) became synonymous in England with "pawnbroker" or "moneylender." In fact, it was because Italian moneylenders came to England in the thirteenth century that Edward I was able to do without Jews and could expel them from the nation. 


Ö once upon the hip




Shylock broods on the wrongs he and his have suffered, and he mutters: 


If I can catch him once upon the hip [at a disadvantage], /

will feed fat the ancient grudge I bear him.

He hates our sacred nation.. .





óAct I, scene iii, lines 43-45 


The hatred is thus mutual (and in a passage shortly to come Antonio makes it clear that it is). The villainy is not, however. To the Christian audience, Shylock's hatred of Christians is a mark of dark and malignant villainy, but Antonio's hatred of Jews is very natural and even praiseworthy. Undoubtedly, if the audience consisted entirely of Jews, the view would be precisely reversed-and no more rational. 
This double standard in viewing the ethical behavior of oneself and one's enemy is common to almost all men and is the despair of the few. 


The skillful shepherd Ö




Antonio and Bassanio are anxious for a definite reply from Shylock, but Shylock delays as he considers how best he might turn Antonio's need to his advantage. 
Shylock is stung, too, by Antonio's scornful hint that ordinarily he does not lend or borrow at interest. Shylock feels it necessary to prove that shrewd bargaining is not sinful. 
He turns to the Old Testament and cites the case of Jacob, who agreed with his uncle, Laban, to herd his sheep and goats and take for his own pay only those lambs and kids who were born streaked, spotted, or otherwise not of solid color. 
Ordinarily these would have made up a tiny minority of the young (which was why Laban agreed to the bargain), but Jacob peeled wands in such a way as to give them a striped appearance and placed them where the ewes would see them during the act of mating. Shylock says: 


The skillful shepherd pilled me certain wands,

And in the doing of the deed of kind [mating]

He stuck them up before the fulsome ewes,

Who then conceiving, did in eaning [lambing] time

Fall parti-colored lambs, and those were Jacob's.

This was a way to thrive, and he was blest;

And thrift is blessing if men steal it not.





óAct I, scene iii, lines 81-87 


The story is a reasonably accurate rendition of the second half of the thirtieth chapter of Genesis. The belief that the characteristics of the young can be influenced by the nature of the environment during conception and pregnancy is part of the folklore of the ages, but it lacks any real foundation. No reputable biologist accepts this view, nor can real evidence be cited for it, and even the authority of the Bible is insufficient to put it across. 
If the biblical tale were true and if the young animals were born as described, it would have had to be the result of a miracle and not of any natural event brought about by Jacob. 


Ö cite ScriptureÖ




The case of Jacob is a poor one to support usury (something Antonio quickly poults out), and a real Jew could easily have found better arguments. However, the use of the Jacob tale is to condemn Shylock to the andience rather than to support him. Since he is made to quote, with approval, a shady act of business on the part of Jacob, the audience can nod to each other and say "Jews were always like that from the very beginning." 
But to avoid some of the blame appearing to stick to the Bible rather than to Shylock (for Shakespeare never knowingly sought trouble with the authorities) Antonio is made to remark in an aside to Bassanio: 


The devil can cite Scripture for his purpose.




óAct I, scene iii, line 95 


This is not merely a metaphorical reference to Shylock, but is a direct derivation from a biblical tale. Matthew tells of Jesus being tested in the desert by the devil, who tries to persuade Jesus to display miraculous powers for prideful self-aggrandizement. 
Thus, the devil takes Jesus to the top of the Temple in Jerusalem and urges him to jump off in order that he might display the protection that angels would afford him. The devil accompanies his urging with a quotation from the Old Testament, saying: "Ö for it is written, He shall give his angels charge concerning thee: and in their hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy foot against a stone." (This is from Matthew 4:6 and the quotation is from Psalms 91:11-12.)


Ö my Jewish gaberdine




As Shylock continues to be pressed, his politeness suddenly snaps and his hatred peeps forth. Bitterly, he begins: 


Signior Antonio, many a time and oft

In the Rialto you have rated [reviled] me

About my moneys and my usances.

Still [Always] have I borne it with a patient shrug.

For suffranee [patience] is the badge of all our tribe.

You call me misbeliever, cutthroat dog,

And spit upon my Jewish gaberdine,




óAct I, scene iii, lines 103-9 


The Jewish gaberdine was a long, coarse cloak of the kind pilgrims wore in humility, to show that they were approaching some shrine as sinners hoping to be forgiven. In many places, Jews were forced to wear some distinctive garb of humiliating nature that had the double duty of indicating to the world what sinners they were and at the same time warning Christians from afar, so that they need not be sullied by showing Jews any kindness or courtesy. 
Indeed, in the very city of Venice in which this play is laid, and in 1516, some eighty years before the play was written, the authorities went further. It was decided to herd the Jews into a special quarter which could be efficiently isolated. In part, this was a further development of the idea that Jews should not pollute Christians with their presence; and in part there was a kind of humanity behind it, since the Jews were safer in their own section and could be more easily protected by the authorities against looting and lynching. (They could also be more easily massacred en masse if the authorities chose to look the other way.) 
For the purpose, the Venetians chose an island on which an iron foundry (gheto in Italian) must once have stood, for that was the name of the island. It was established as the Jewish quarter and "ghetto," with an additional "t," has gone ringing down history ever since as the name for any Jewish quarter anywhere and, in very recent times, for any city area occupied largely by any minority group. 
Again, a vicious cycle was established. The Jews were forced to dress differently and live separately and were then hated for being different and exclusive. 


Ö an equal pound of your fair flesh.. .




Shylock's point is that he can scarcely be expected to lend money to someone who has treated him with such scorn and hatred. If Antonio had, at this point, been diplomatic, the loan might have been made in ordinary fashion and that would have been that. Instead, however, Antonio answers cruelly: 


I am as like to call thee so [dog] again,

To spit on thee again, to spurn thee too.





óAct I, scene iii, lines 127-28 


This is utterly out of character for Antonio, who throughout the play is shown to be the soul of courtesy, gentleness, and love, and in the end has mercy even on Shylock. But Shakespeare needs a motive for Shylock's behavior in this play, and Antonio's harshness now, when Shylock all but begs for some sort of Christian remorse for the cruelty shown him, turns his persecuted heart to stone. 
He agrees to make the loan but only on a queer condition, saying: 


If you repay me not on such a day,

In such a place, such sum or sums as are

Expressed in the condition, let the forfeit

Be nominated for an equal pound

Of your fair flesh, to be cut off and taken

In what part of your body pleaseth me.





óAct I, scene iii, lines 142-48 


On the surface, there is some generosity being shown here. Shylock is lending money without interest. If he is repaid on time, he will take only the three thousand ducats he is lending, no more. And if the money is not repaid, there is a forfeit of a pound of flesh, no money at all. 
Shylock suggests this as a kind of merry jest, but it is clear that he is playing a long shot. He has already expressed his doubts of the safety of Antonio's manifold sea ventures, and if something should happen to them, by means of the forfeit he can kill Antonio. If the ships come home safe, he loses interest, of course, but after Antonio's remarks, the loss of interest is worth the slender chance of killing him legally. 
Bassanio and Antonio both realize this, and Bassanio, in horror, refuses the deal. Antonio, however, convinced that his ships will return, insists on agreeing to the terms. 
It is from this passage and from those following in the play that the phrase "pound of flesh" has entered the language as meaning the wringing out of the last bit of a bargain, however harsh and brutal the consequences.


Ö my complexion




The Shylock and Portia scenes now alternate. Back in Belmont, a new suitor arrives, the Prince of Morocco, who begins: 


Mislike me not for my complexion,

The shadowed livery of the burnished sun,

To whom I am a neighbor and near bred.





óAct II, scene i, lines 1-3 


There is nothing here to indicate that the Prince of Morocco is anything more than a Moor, that is, a swarthy member of the "white race." However, Shakespeare's emphasis on his complexion induces us to think that he was imagined as a black, for Shakespeare confused Moors and blacks, as in Titus Andronicus (see page I-402). 


Ö Sultan Solyman




As Morocco prepares to take the test of the casket, he can't resist boasting a little. He swears he would dare anything to win Portia: 


By this scimitar

That slew the Sophy, and a Persian prince

That won three fields of Sultan Solyman,





óAct II, scene i, lines 24-26 


"Sultan Solyman" is Suleiman I the Magnificent, under whom the empire of the Ottoman Turks reached the peak of its glory. He reigned from 1520 to 1566 and during that reign he was the strongest ruler in Europe, far greater in war and peace than the contemporary Christian monarchs: Henry VIII, Charles V, and Francis I (see page II-747), whose names make so much greater noise in the West-oriented chronicles of our historians. 
During the early part of his reign Suleiman led the Ottoman armies deep into Europe. In 1526 he destroyed the Hungarian army at the Battle of Mohacs and absorbed most of Hungary into his realm. In 1529 he reached the peak of his fortunes when he actually laid siege to Vienna (which, however, he did not succeed in taking). 
Suleiman might have done even better against Europe, had he not also had to face eastward and battle the Persians, who, although Moslems, were of a different sect. Between 1548 and 1555 there was strenuous war between Suleiman and the Persians; a war which was won by Suleiman, but not by a very great margin. There were further wars between the Ottoman Empire and the Persians after Suleiman's death. Indeed, one was in progress at the time The Merchant of Venice was being written, so that Morocco's reference was topical. 
From Morocco's words we might suppose he fought as an Ottoman ally, for it was Persians he claims to have beaten. When Morocco says he "slew the Sophy," he is referring to the Shah of Persia. 
In the sixteenth century Persia was undergoing one of its periods of greatness under the rule of a family descended from one San-al-Din, who had lived in the thirteenth century. The family was called the Safavids, and this became "Sophy" in English. 
The first ruler of the Safavid line was Ismail I, who came to the throne in 1501. In 1587 Abbas I became shah. He was the greatest of the line and is sometimes called Abbas the Great. He labored to reform and revitalize the Persian army and make it more fit to defend the land against the Ottoman Turks. In this he had some help, for in 1598 an English mission arrived in Persia to negotiate a treaty against the common Turkish enemy. 
Thus, at the tune that The Merchant of Venice was written, references to Persia and the Sophy were easily understood. 
Nevertheless, Morocco, despite his vauntings, realizes that the casket choice means that luck, not valor, will give the victory. He says: 


// Hercules and Lichas play at dice

Which is the better man, the greater throw

May turn by fortune from the weaker hand.

So is Alcides beaten by his page.





óAct II, scene i, lines 32-35 


Lichas is the attendant of Hercules (or Alcides, see page I-70), and, as it happens, he comes to a bad end (see page I-380). 


Ö thou a merry devil




Before we come to Morocco's casket choice, however, it is back to Venice and a distant glimpse of Shylock's home life. Onto the stage comes Launcelot Gobbo, Shylock's Christian house servant. Launcelot is considering leaving Shylock, for as a good Christian, he has qualms about serving a Jew. 
Eventually, after an encounter with his blind father, Launcelot enters the service of Bassanio. He announces this change of service to Shylock's daughter (who makes her first appearance). She says:


I am sorry thou wilt leave my father so;

Our house is hell, and thou a merry devil

Didst rob it of some taste of tediousness.





óAct II, scene iii, lines 1-3 


There is, of course, nothing to indicate that Shylock is cruel to his daughter or anything but a good family man (although he is later shown to be puritanical and intent on keeping his daughter from participating in foolish merrymaking). Nevertheless, the audience would readily assume that a Jew's home would be bound to be hellish. 
Jessica is beautiful and lacks all the stigmata associated by Elizabethan audiences with Jews. Thus, Launcelot weeps at leaving her, even though she is as Jewish as Shylock. 
This is, of course, an old convention. The villainous Jew (or Moslem, or Indian chief, or Chinese mandarin) very frequently has a beautiful daughter who falls in love with the handsome Christian and betrays her people for his sake to the cheers of the audience. In modern action tales, the beautiful Russian girl can hardly wait to fall in love with the handsome American spy and switch sides. (The audience would consider it unspeakably horrible if the situation were reversed, however.) 
The name "Jessica" by the way, is not likely to strike modern readers as particularly Jewish, yet is much more so than "Shylock." Toward the end of the eleventh chapter of Genesis, the sister of the wife of Abraham's brother, Nahor, is given as Iscah. It is of this name that Jessica is a form. 


Become a ChristianÖ




That Jessica is in love with a Christian appears at once, for she loves Lorenzo, who has already appeared as a friend of Antonio's. Jessica says in a soliloquy after bidding Launcelot goodbye: 


Alack, what heinous sin is it in me

To be ashamed to be my father's child!

But though I am a daughter to his blood,

I am not to his manners.

O Lorenzo, If thou keep promise,

I shall end this strife,

Become a Christian and thy loving wife!





óAct II, scene iii, lines 16-21 


This demonstrates that medieval prejudice against the Jew was, in theory at least, religious rather than racial. If the Jew were to consent to become a Christian he would then be accepted into the Christian community on an equal basis.
Actually, this was by no means always so. In Spain and Portugal in the fifteenth century, extreme pressures forced the conversion of many Jews, who were then nevertheless discriminated against by those who took to calling themselves "Old Christians." The converts were called "marranos" ("swine"), and no matter how they attempted to be Christian they were forever suspected of being secretly Jewish. 


Ö Black Monday Ö




The opportunity for Jessica to run off with Lorenzo soon appears. Shy-lock has been invited to dinner with Bassanio, and he is going despite the fact that he will "smell pork." This means Jessica will be left alone. 
Launcelot Gobbo, who has carried the invitation from his new master to his old, promises there will be entertainment (to Shylock's further discomfort, for he is puritanical in his outlook-another proof of villainy to a theatergoing audience). Launcelot says: 


I will not say you shall see a masque, but if you do,

it was not for nothing that my nose fell a-bleeding

on Black Monday last at six o'clock i' th' morning,





óAct II, scene v, lines 22-25 


This is a satire against the habit of finding a premonition in everything. After all, what can a nosebleed "on Black Monday last" have to do with a masque tonight? 
The adjective "black" is sometimes used to commemorate some particularly disastrous occurrence. This particular case dates back to 1360, some two and a quarter centuries before The Merchant of Venice was written. At that tune Edward III, who had won two great victories in France (see page II-257), settled down in March to lay siege to Paris itself. 
The army was reduced in numbers as the result of the previous winter's campaigning and was in want of provisions besides. It was not equipped to withstand a really bad siege of weather, but it was hoped that with spring well under way and the French badly demoralized the siege would not last long. 
How wrong they were! On Monday, April 14, 1360, the day after Easter Sunday, a tremendous hailstorm struck the English camp. The fierce wind and unseasonable cold, the hail and the darkness all combined to strike a superstitious fear into the hearts of those who survived the horrible day. 
The siege was lifted and Edward himself was sufficiently disheartened to decide on peace. This was signed on May 8 and the rest of Edward's long reign was an inglorious anticlimax. England was not to regain the upper hand in France until the reign of Henry V and the Battle of Agincourt (see page II-498) a half century later. 
This Black Monday of 1360 left enough impression on English minds to give the name to Easter Monday ever after. 


Ö Hagar's offspring Ö




But Launcelot is doing more than bringing Bassanio's invitation to Shy-lock. He is also bringing a secret message from Lorenzo to Jessica, arranging for the elopement, and he cannot resist hinting to her of this in phrases that Shylock imperfectly overhears. Shylock says sharply to Jessica: 


What says that fool of Hagar's offspring, ha?





óAct II, scene vi, line 43 


Sarah, the wife of Abraham and the ancestress of the Jews, had a handmaiden named Hagar. Since Sarah herself was barren, she gave the handmaiden to Abraham in order that he might have a son by her. This, indeed, came to pass and Hagar's son was named Ishmael. 
When, years later, Sarah herself bore Abraham a son, Isaac, it was this younger son who was designated as Abraham's heir. Ishmael and his mother, Hagar, were evicted from the family and sent away in order that there be no dispute over the inheritance. 
Thus, one might metaphorically speak of Hagar's offspring, Ishmael, as representing those who did not really inherit the covenant God made with Abraham and over whom the mantle of the true religion did not fall. Shylock would use such a term as a contemptuous designation for any Christian. 
Jessica quiets her father's suspicions and, as soon as he is gone, she disguises herself as a boy and joins Lorenzo, taking with her a good supply of her father's money. 
That she should escape from her father and elope with a lover, anyone would be ready to excuse since we are all sympathetic with the drives of love. That she should also steal from her father is a less sympathetic action in modern eyes. However, to Elizabethan audiences, stealing from a Jew was not really stealing. 


The Hyrcanian deserts. ..




Meanwhile the Prince of Morocco, back in Belmont, must choose among the three caskets. The gold casket bears a legend that says:


"Who chooseth me shall gain what many men desire."




 -Act II, scene vii, line 37


Morocco does not hesitate. Surely this can only refer to Portia, for as he says: 


The Hyrcanian deserts and the vasty wilds

Of wide Arabia are as throughfares now

For princes to come view fair Portia.





óAct II, scene vii, lines 41-43 


Regions are named which are as distant and unattainable as can be imagined. Arabia is an utterly unknown desert to Christians of Shakespeare's time, and the original home of the feared Moslems. 
As for Hyrcania, that was the name of the region south of the Caspian Sea (which was therefore called the Hyrcanian Sea in Roman times). Hyrcania reached its period of greatest prominence in the time of the Parthian Empire during the first and second centuries. Parthia was then the great enemy of Rome and its Hyrcanian heartland was never reached by Roman armies. 
So Morocco chooses the golden casket and finds a skull inside. Apparently many men desire gold and, in searching out their heart's desire, find death instead. He loses and must leave forthwith. 


Ö he shall pay for this




In Venice, Jessica's elopement has been carried through. Shylock has discovered the loss of his daughter, together with the money and jewels she has stolen, and is distracted. 
He suspects Lorenzo and is sure that he is escaping by way of the ship that is taking Bassanio (along with his friend, Gratiano) to Belmont. A search of the ship reveals nothing, but Shylock is nevertheless convinced that Antonio, the friend of Lorenzo, is at the bottom of it. 
Solanio tells the tale, mimicking the distracted Shylock, who has gone raging through Venice crying for justice against those who stole his daughter and his ducats. The boys of Venice run after him, mocking, and Solanio himself thinks it is all terribly funny, and so, no doubt, did the Elizabethan audience. 
The modern audience, if Shylock is played properly as the tragic character he is, is very likely to find it not funny at all, and to find themselves sympathizing with Shylock Instead. 
Solanio does say one thing rather uneasily:


Let good Antonio look he keep his day,

Or he shall pay for this.





óAct II, scene viii, lines 25-26 


The forfeit of the pound of flesh had been set in a moment of extreme irritation on Shylock's part. If it had come to the touch it is conceivable that Shylock might have relented. But now, maddened by the conspiracy to rob him of possessions and daughter by the very men (as he was convinced) to whom he had supplied necessary money, he could scarcely be expected to want anything but revenge-revenge to the uttermost. And while the thought of the kind of revenge he anticipates is not something we can sympathize with, it is something we can understand if we can bring ourselves to occupy his shoes for a moment in imagination. 


The Prince of Aragon Ö




And in Belmont there comes another suitor. Nerissa announces him to Portia: 


The Prince of Aragon hath ta'en his oath,

And comes to his elections presently.





óAct II, scene ix, lines 2-3 


Aragon was the name of a region on the Spanish side of the central Pyrenees to begin with. It was ruled by the kings of Navarre (see page I-422), but in 1035 Sancho III of Navarre left Aragon to his third son, separating it from his kingdom. Independent Aragon then expanded southward at the expense of the Moors, who at that time controlled much of Spain. 
By the middle of the fifteenth century Aragon occupied the easternmost fourth of what is now Spain. Most of the rest was occupied by the kingdom of Castile. In 1469 the heir of Castile was an eighteen-year-old girl named Isabella, while the heir of Aragon was a seventeen-year-old boy named Ferdinand. It seemed natural to arrange a marriage. In 1474 the girl became Isabella I, Queen of Castile, while her husband ruled jointly with her as Ferdinand V, King of Castile. In 1479 the old King of Aragon died and Isabella's husband also became Ferdinand II of Aragon. 
The two lands were united to form modern Spain and were never separated again. The union was followed by the final defeat of the southern remnant of the Moors in 1492. In that same year Christopher Columbus' first voyage laid the foundation for Spain's vast overseas empire and made her the first true world power. 
Although Aragon thus vanished from the map as an independent power a century before The Merchant of Venice was written, its name remained green in the minds of Englishmen. Ferdinand and Isabella had a daughter who became a famous and, in her time, popular queen of England-Catherine (or Katherine) of Aragon (see page II-754). 
The Prince of Aragon is displayed as a far less attractive character than Morocco. For one thing, he is proud, but then this was taken as a national characteristic of the Spanish stereotype. And, no doubt, the happy accident that Aragon resembles "arrogant" helped Shakespeare choose the title. 
The Prince of Aragon dismisses the leaden casket at once since lead is beneath his dignity. The golden casket offers him what many men desire and that is not for him either, since he is not satisfied with what "many" men desire. He is special. The silver casket has a legend, reading: 


"Who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves."





óAct II, scene ix, line 35 


Aragon recognizes no limits to his own deserts and chooses it. He finds it contains the caricature of a fool's head. Only a fool, in other words, places too high a value on his own deserving, and Aragon loses too. 


Ö the Goodwins.. .




But now things suddenly turn black for Antonio. Even when Solanio had been mocking Shylock's grief-stricken outcries two scenes earlier, his friend Salerio had spoken of rumors concerning lost merchant vessels. Now the news is more specific and more damaging. Salerio reports to Solanio the news that 


Ö Antonio hath a ship of rich lading

wracked on the narrow seas-the Goodwins

I think they call the place-a very

dangerous flat, and fatalÖ





óAct III, scene i, lines 2-5 


The "narrow seas" is the English Channel, or perhaps the Strait of Dover (only two dozen miles wide) in particular. It would seem to us that a Venetian would be more likely to refer to the strait between Italy and Sicily or Spain and Africa as the "narrow seas," but to the English audience of the play, the phrase would have only one meaning. 
The "Goodwins" are the Goodwin Sands, seven miles east of the southeastern tip of England. These are a ten-mile-long stretch of treacherous shoals, where the sands are actually partly exposed at low tide.


Ö I am a Jew. ..




Shylock enters, sorrow-laden and bitter. The two Venetians jeer at him, but when they ask about news concerning Antonio, it is clear that matters are worse and worse. Shylock is now grimly intent on his bargain and he echoes Solanio's earlier remark when he says of Antonio: 


Let him look to his bond.

He was wont to call me usurer. Let him look to his bond.





óAct III, scene i, lines 44-45 


When Salerio, rather shaken out of his mockery, asks what use Shylock will find in a piece of human flesh, Shylock bursts out into a moving defense of himself and his fellows. It would almost seem that Shakespeare, driven by the force of his own genius and the necessity of creating a well-rounded character at all costs, gives Shylock-all against the playwright's own will, one might think-a tragic dignity and puts words in his mouth that the mocking Venetians can find no words to answer. 
What does he want with the pound of flesh? Shylock grinds out: 


To bait fish withal. If it will feed nothing else,

it will feed my revenge. He hath disgraced me,

and hind'red me half a mil lion,

laughed at my losses, mocked at my gains,

scorned my nation, thwarted my bargains,

cooled my friends, heated mine

enemies-and what's his reason?

I am a Jew. Hath not a Jew eyes?

Hath not a Jew hands, organs, dimensions, senses,

af fections, passions?-

fed with the same food, hurt with the same weapons,

subject to the same diseases, healed by the same means,

warmed and cooled by the same winter and sum mer as a Christian is?

If you prick us, do we not bleed?

If you tickle us, do we not laugh?

If you poison us, do we not die?

And if you wrong us, shall we not revenge?

If we are like you in the rest, we will resemble you in that.

If a Jew wrong a Christian,

what is his [the Christian's theoretical] humility?

Revenge! If a Christian wrong a Jew,

what should his sufferance [patience] be by Christian example?

Why re venge! The villainy you teach me

I will execute, and it shall go hard but

I will better the instruction.





óAct HI, scene i, lines 50-69 


Remember this is a Jew's defense as placed in his mouth by someone not friendly to Jews. It is not, therefore, the most effective defense a Jew can make. Even so, the points are clear. Shylock does not claim to be better than a Christian. He merely claims to be no worse, and even in the context of the play, that gives him a great deal of room. Everyone in the play humiliates and torments him without conscience or remorse and nowhere and at no time do they consider it wrong. Even the saintly Antonio sees no wrong here. 
Shylock, at least, recognizes villainy when he sees it. He admits his own plan to be villainous. His defense is that it has been taught him by Christians. In recognizing the villainy, he rises, in a way, an ethical notch above his tormenters. 


How now, Tubal. ..




Solanio and Salerio leave the stage with another sneer, but with no attempt at a real answer. Another Jew enters. Shylock greets him at once with feverish anxiety: 


How now, Tubal! What news from Genoa?

Hast thou found my daughter?





óAct III, scene i, lines 75-76 


Tubal is no more a personal Jewish name than Shylock is. The name is to be found in the listing of nations in the tenth chapter of Genesis, where in the second verse it is written, "The sons of Japheth; Gomer, and Magog, and Madai, and Javan, and Tubal, and Meshech, and Tiras." These are taken to be the names of tribes and regions rather than of true individuals. 
The one place where Tubal occurs in a context familiar to the casual biblical reader is in Genesis 4:22, which reads, "And Zillah, she also bare Tubal-cain, an instructor of every artificer in brass and iron." 
According to biblical legend, then, Tubal-cain was the first metallurgist. But even here the name means "smith of Tubal," a region in eastern Asia Minor (one suspects from Assyrian records) famous for its metal production. 
Tubal has brought no definite news of Jessica's whereabouts, but has evidence that she gave one of Shylock's jeweled rings to a sailor in exchange for a monkey. Shylock groans in agony and says: 


Thou tortures! me, Tubal.It was my turquoise;

1 had it of Leah when I was a bachelor.

I would not have given it for a wilderness of monkeys.





óAct III, scene i, lines 113-16 


Shylock's frustrated outcry is undoubtedly designed to get a laugh, and the Elizabethan audience undoubtedly obliged. For us, however, this is surely a remarkably touching moment. Could Shylock, this monster of evil, so love his dead wife and honor her memory? Could there be a spark of love in his harsh heart? Was he a human being? 
And what of Jessica, with whom the audience is expected to be completely in sympathy? The ring was her mother's. Was she so completely dead to family affection as to part with it for so trivial and unworthy an exchange? What might this tell us of the effect of conversion from Judaism to Christianity-and does anyone in the audience think of that? 
And at the very tune Shylock's heart is ground by the loss of his wife's ring, he hears that Antonio is losing everything through a succession of shipwrecks. More than ever now, he must have his pound of flesh of the man who has abused him so much and who (he surely believes) has arranged the elopement of his wicked daughter. 


Ö a swanlike end




Meanwhile Bassanio and Gratiano have arrived in Belmont. Portia is desperately in love with Bassanio and does not want him to choose, fearing he will guess wrong and be forced to leave. He, however, wants to choose, for he cannot bear the suspense. He advances to the test and Portia, in agony, says: 


Let music sound while he doth make his choice;

Then if he lose he makes a swanlike end,





óAct III, scene ii, lines 43-44 


From classical times it was believed that swans sang before they died. Apparently it seemed natural to suppose that a bird so dignified, graceful, and austerely beautiful ought to be admirable in everything. So many birds were remarkable for the sweetness of their song that if the beautiful swan was mute, surely it could only be because it was saving something supremely wonderful for some divine climax. When better could this climax come than at its death? 
This was prettified by legend makers. The swan was felt to be sacred to Apollo and to be filled with his spirit of song at the approach of death, glorying in translation, perhaps, to a better world. 
This symbolism of a glorious afterlife, which many of the ancients longed for and which became part of Christian dogma, must have kept the legend going despite the fact that no one ever heard a swan sing at any time. "Swan song" is still used for the last work of a creative artist of any sort.


Ö young AlcidesÖ




Portia feels Bassanio is going to fight the demon of chance for her hand and compares him to 


Ö young Alcides, when he did redeem

The virgin tribute paid by howling Troy

To the sea monster.





óAct III, scene ii, lines 53-57 


The reference is to the rescue of Hesione (see page I-403). 


Hard food for Midas. ..




Portia has self-righteously declared she cannot give Bassanio any hints, but the music she orders played contains hints just the same. The song urges him to judge not by his eyes alone. 
Bassanio gets the point and at once begins to ruminate on the way in which objects that are fair without may be worth nothing within. Apostrophizing the golden casket, he says: 


Ö Therefore then, thou gaudy gold,

Hard food for Midas, I will none of thee;




óAct III, scene ii, lines 101-2 


In Greek legend Midas was a king of Phrygia-a land in western Asia Minor that existed prior to 700 b.c. and was then destroyed by nomadic invaders from the east. It did have kings named Mita, which could easily become Midas in Greek. 
Phrygia, which gathered its wealth from over a large territory and concentrated it in the royal palace, must have seemed powerful and rich to the tiny city-states of Greece, who were in those days sunk in a Dark Age. Naturally, the wealth of King Midas became legendary. 
The story that arose was that Midas had come across the drunken Sile-nus, a favorite of the wine god, Dionysus. Midas treated Silenus well and in return Dionysus offered him anything he might wish. Greedily, Midas asked that anything he touched be turned to gold. This worked well for a while, until he tried to eat. His food turned to gold as he touched it and Midas realized that the "golden touch" meant starvation. He had to beg Dionysus to relieve him of the dangerous gift. 
This legend has always been popular among those who, lacking wealth, find in it the consolation of knowing that "money isn't everything," and Bassanio, in scorning gold, gives it the most unfavorable allusion he can think of. It was merely "hard food for Midas." 


In speed to Padua.. .




Bassanio chooses the leaden casket as the one least subject to dissimulation without, and, of course, it contains Portia's portrait The two may now marry and are in transports of delight Portia gives Bassanio a ring which he must never part with and the young man swears he will surrender it only with his life. Gratiano chimes in to say he has fallen in love with, and will now marry, Portia's lady in waiting, Nerissa. She gives Gratiano a ring, also. 
At the height of their happiness, Lorenzo, Jessica, and Salerio arrive from Venice with the news that Antonio, beggared by the wreckage of his fleets, was unable to meet his debt to Shylock, who is now demanding his pound of flesh. 
Portia hastens to send Bassanio back to Venice, placing her entire fortune at his disposal so that he might buy of! Shylock. For herself, she has additional plans. She gives a message to a servant, saying: 


Take this same letter,

And use thou all th'endeavor of a man In speed to Padua.

See thou render this Into my cousin's hands, Doctor Bellario;





óAct III, scene iv, lines 47-50 


Portia's cousin Bellario is apparently a professor of law at the University of Padua (see page I-447), and her plan involves him and, as she quickly explains to Nerissa, their masquerading as men. (This is a favorite device in the romances of the period. Shakespeare has already used it in The Two Gentlemen of Verona, see page I-469, and in this play, Jessica has already made use of the masquerade. Thus, all three female characters in The Merchant of Venice appear, at one time or another, in the costume of a man.) 


Ö the sins of the fatherÖ




With Portia and Nerissa gone, Lorenzo and Jessica are in charge at Belmont, and with them, of course, is Launcelot Gobbo, who affects to be unimpressed by Jessica's conversion. He refers to an Old Testament text to make his point when he says:


Ö look you the sins of the father

are to be laid upon the children.





óAct III, scene v, lines 1-2 


This is taken from the Ten Commandments themselves. As part of the second commandment, God is quoted as saying: "Ö I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me" (Exodus 21:5). 
This is actually a rather primitive view, which is altered in the course of the Old Testament itself. The prophet Ezekiel, writing in the time of the Babylonian Exile, quotes God as saying: "Yet say ye, Why? doth not the son bear the iniquity of the father? When the son hath done that which is lawful and right, and hath kept all my statutes, and hath done them, he shall surely live. The soul that sinneth, it shall die. The son shall not bear the iniquity of the father, neither shall the father bear the iniquity of the son: the righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him, and the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him" (Ezekiel 18:19-20). 
Nevertheless, the harsher and more primitive verses of the Old Testament seem always the better known to Christians (perhaps for the greater contrast they make with the New). 


Ö Charybdis your mother. ..




Of course, Launcelot admits, it may be that Jessica's mother was unfaithful and that Jessica is not truly the daughter of Shylock. Jessica points out that then her mother's sin of infidelity would be visited upon herself and Launcelot agrees and says: 


Thus when I shun Scylla your father,

I fall into Charybdis your mother.

Well, you are gone both ways.




óAct III, scene v, lines 15-17 


Scylla and Charybdis were a pair of deadly dangers which in Homer's Odyssey are described as being on either side of a narrow strait. The strait in question is generally accepted as being the Strait of Messina between Italy and Sicily-which is two and a half miles wide at its narrowest 
Scylla is described as a monster on the Italian side of the strait. It has twelve legs and six heads. Each head is on a long neck and is armed with a triple row of teeth. (It is almost impossible to resist the temptation that this is the distorted description of a large octopus with its sucker-studded tentacles.) The heads bark like so many puppies and during the confused yelping, the necks dart forth, with each head snatching at a sailor on any ship that passes beneath. 
Charybdis was the personification of a whirlpool on the Sicilian side of the strait, which three times a day sucked down the waters and then threw them up again. 
Odysseus had to pass the strait twice. First, with a full ship, he chanced Scylla and lost six men. The next time, alone on a raft, he passed across Charybdis, seizing a branch overhead when the raft was sucked down and waiting for its return before proceeding. 
To be "between Scylla and Charybdis" is the classical way of saying "between the devil and the deep sea." The statement "avoiding Scylla, he fell into Charybdis" was used by the Roman poet Horace, whom Launcelot is here paraphrasing. 


Ö saved by my husband. ..




Jessica, however, counters all Launcelot's misgivings with a reference to the New Testament, saying: 


/ shall be saved by my husband.

He hath made me a Christian.





óAct III, scene v, lines 18-19 


St. Paul in his first epistle to the Corinthians says "Ö the unbelieving husband is sanctified by the wife, and the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the husband: else were your children uncleanÖ" (1 Corinthians 7:14). 
All this may be mere persiflage, but one is at least entitled to wonder if the cautious Shakespeare is trying to save himself trouble. Anticipating the reactions of those displeased at making a heroine of a Jew's daughter, he places their arguments in the mouth of the clown and answers them. 


Ö hope for mercy.. .




In Venice, Antonio must stand trial. All of Venice, from the Duke himself on downward, are on Antonio's side; all plead with Shylock not to insist on the forfeit. Shylock does insist, however. What's more, he will not accept money in place of the pound of flesh. He wants his revenge, not money. 
The Duke says: 


How shalt thou hope for mercy, rend'ring none?





óAct IV, scene i, line 88 


Here is another New Testament reference, for it is an echo of the Sermon on the Mount, where Jesus says: "Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy" (Matthew 5:7). 
Shylock does not bother to defend himself directly; nor does he hypocritically pretend to be merciful. Instead, he faces down the angry crowd of Christians in the courtroom with a neat poniarding of their hypocrisy. Scornfully, he says: 


You have among you many a purchased slave,

Which like your asses and your dogs and mules

You use in abject and in slavish parts,

Because you bought them.





óAct IV, scene i, lines 90-93 


Shylock has bought human flesh as the Venetians have and has done it at three thousand ducats a pound, a far greater price than any Venetian paid for his. If Shylock is expected to give up what he has bought, why are not the Venetians expected to give up their purchases? (The argument is not foolproof. Shylock is being offered a huge sum to give up his pound; and his purchase means death for a man, as the purchase of an entire body does not. Nevertheless, the point of hypocrisy is made.) 


Ö opinion with Pythagoras




The Duke can see no way out of the Shylock-imposed dilemma, unless Bellario, the renowned lawyer from Padua (Portia's cousin), has some helpful opinion to offer. While they wait for a message, Shylock gets his knife ready and Gratiano bitterly berates him, saying: 


Thou almost mak'st me waver in my faith,

To hold opinion with Pythagoras

That souls of men infuse themselves

Into the trunks of men. Thy currish spirit

Governed a wolf who, hanged for human slaughter,





óAct IV, scene i, lines 130-34 


Pythagoras, an ancient Greek philosopher of the sixth century b.c., believed in the transmigration of souls. There is a famous story that he once stopped an animal from being beaten because he insisted he recognized the voice of a dead friend. (I wonder if that might not have been merely a humane device to stop the beating of an animal.) 
Clearly, such transmigration is counter to Christian doctrine, and for Gratiano to accept it would mean that he had wavered in his faith.
The reference to a hanged wolf may well have referred to Lopez (see page I-514), whose very name is related to the Spanish word for wolf. 


The quality of mercy.. .




Now Portia's plan reveals itself. The message from Bellario comes, brought by Nerissa in man's costume. Bellario cannot come himself but sends a young lawyer, Balthasar, in his place. Balthasar is, of course, Portia in disguise. 
Portia too calls for mercy and says Shylock must be merciful. Shylock demands where in the law it says he must be merciful and Portia retreats, but in doing so delivers one of the most famous speeches in all of Shakespeare, one which begins: 


The quality of mercy is not strained [forced];

It droppeth as the gentle rain from heaven

Upon the place beneath,..





óAct IV, scene i, lines 183-85 


It is true, then, that one is not compelled to be merciful, but mercy doesn't require compulsion. One is merciful simply because it is so wonderful to oneself and to others to be merciful. 


Wrest once the law.. .




Shylock nevertheless refuses. He insists on the letter of the law and nothing else, crying: 


I crave the law,





óAct IV, scene i, line 205 


Bassanio desperately offers ten times the original loan, and if that fails, he urges the young judge to 


Wrest once the law to your authority.

To do a great right, do a little wrong,





óAct IV, scene i, lines 214-15 


In a sense, this reflects a great philosophic struggle between Jew and Christian (as interpreted through Christian thought) between the letter and the spirit. In the New Testament the orthodox Pharisees are pictured as insisting on the letter of the law, while the more liberal Jesus is willing to bend the letter if that means retaining the spirit. 
St. Paul makes this specific by saying that God "Ö hath made us able ministers of the new testament; not of the letter, but of the spirit: for the letter killeth, but the spirit giveth life" (2 Corinthians 3:6). 


A Daniel come to judgment Ö




But it is not so easy to bend the law. Venice is a commercial, trading city and must deal with a wide variety of foreigners with other customs and beliefs. Venetian law, like Venetian money, must inspire confidence and it cannot unless it is equitable and just and never bent to personal advantage. 
Portia points out that to palter with the law would set bad precedents, and Shylock cries out exultantly: 


A Daniel come to judgment! Yea, a Daniel!

O wise young judge, how 1 do honor thee!





óAct IV, scene i, lines 222-23


Daniel, in the biblical Book of Daniel, is a wise interpreter of dreams, but the reference here is to Daniel's role in the apocryphal book of The History of Susanna. 
The heroine of the book, Susanna, a chaste wife, is lusted after by two wicked elders. Her virtue was proof against their ancient charms and they conspired to accuse her of adultery to punish her. They stated they had seen her intimate with a young man and the court condemned Susanna to death. 
At this point Daniel, a young man at the time, entered the story (just as "Balthasar" did). He demanded the right to cross-examine the elders separately before the council. He asked each the name of the tree under which he had seen the criminal intimacy take place. Not having concerted this part of the story, they named different trees and it was plain that they were lying. Susanna was freed and the elders executed. 
Of course, since Susanna is an apocryphal book and not part of the Bible in the Jewish tradition, Shylock would not be apt to refer to it in reality. 


Ö the stock of Barabbas




It seems that all is lost for Antonio. Shylock even refuses to pay the expense of a surgeon to help Antonio after the operation, because that is not part of the agreement (something which loses any sympathy any Elizabethan might possibly have for him).
Antonio makes a last touching speech that so moves Bassanio that he says (and, one can only believe, sincerely) that he would gladly deliver his new wife to Shylock's ruthless clutches if only that would save Antonio (and here Shakespeare's feeling of the utter nobility of male affection and its greater strength than that between man and woman shines through). Gratiano chimes in with a similar wish, and both Portia and Nerissa, in their male disguises, cannot hide the fact that such gestures sit rather poorly with them. 
As for Shylock, the strong family man, he finds these remarks revolting and says: 


These be the Christian husbands! I have a daughter;

Would any of the stock of Barabbas

Had been her husband, rather than a Christian!





óAct IV, scene i, lines 294-96


There is scarcely a name that rings so unpleasantly in Christian ears as "Barabbas." In the New Testament, it is the name of a prisoner who was slated for execution when Jesus was. Because it was the time of Passover, Pontius Pilate offered to free a prisoner and put it up to the populace: "Ö Whom will ye that I release unto you? Barabbas, or JesusÖ" (Matthew 27:17). Since the populace demanded the release of Barabbas, Jesus was led out to crucifixion. 
Matthew merely describes Barabbas as "a notable prisoner" (Matthew 27:16), but Mark says that Barabbas 'lay bound with them that had made insurrection with him, who had committed murder in the insurrection" (Mark 15:7). Barabbas, in other words, had been taken after having participated in a rebellion against Rome. In the nationalistic spirit of the times one can see that to the Jewish masses Barabbas may have been a hero, but to the Christians of later times, he was a murderer whose life was unjustly traded for that of Jesus. 
Marlowe in his The Jew of Malta called his Jew Barabbas, so that his villainy would be expressed in his very name. Shylock's remark can thus be interpreted as being a wish that Jessica had married even the worst kind of Jew (or, from the Christian standpoint, any Jew) rather than any Christian. (It is an odd point in favor of Shylock, and one rarely remarked upon, that despite what his daughter has done to him, he regrets her marriage because of his belief that a Christian would make an unkind husband. It would seem he still loves his daughter.) 
Again, since Barabbas is a name that does not occur in the Old Testament, Shylock, in reality, would not have made the reference.


Ö become a Christian




Shylock is ready to take his pound of flesh when suddenly Portia stops him. She turns his insistence of the letter of the law against him. There is no mention of blood in the bond and therefore Shylock must take his pound of flesh without spilling one drop of Christian blood. What's more, he must take exactly a pound, neither the tiniest fraction more or less. 
It is a legal quibble, but under the circumstances, it has its logic. 
Shylock finds himself caught and offers to take the three-times payment Bassanio has offered. Bassanio is willing, but Portia grimly insists on the letter of the law. Shylock asks for his bare principal, but Portia insists on the letter. Shylock offers to abandon the money altogether and even that cannot be done, for in planning to take the pound of flesh he was a foreigner seeking the life of a Venetian, and as such, half of all his goods is forfeit to Antonio and half to the state. 
(Actually, if we were arguing law, then, in the existence of a statute against a foreigner seeking the life of a Venetian, the agreement to accept a pound of flesh as forfeit for non-payment of a loan to a foreigner was illegal to begin with.) 
Antonio now displays his magnanimity most impressively. That half of Shylock's fortune that is to go to the state he urges be returned to Shylock on the payment of a mere fine (a suggestion first made by the Duke). That half that is to go to Antonio himself, he would turn over to Shylock's daughter, Jessica, and her Christian husband, on Shylock's death. 
But then one thing more is added, which sits less well with a modern audience than with an Elizabethan one. In return for all this, Antonio sets a condition: 


Ö that for this favor

He presently [immediately] become a Christian;





óAct IV, scene i, lines 385-86 


The notion of forced conversion to Christianity was often justified by a verse in Luke. In a parable told in that Gospel, a man giving a feast found that his guests refused his invitation. He therefore sent his servants out to find strangers to attend the feast, and, if necessary, to make them attend by force. "And the lord said unto the servant, Go out into the highways and hedges, and compel them to come in, that my house may be filled" (Luke 14:23). 
And indeed, Christians have converted Jews and pagans at the point of a sword. (So have Moslems and, to be truthful, on at least one occasion, Jews. In the second century b.c. the Maccabean King of Judea, John Hyrcanus I, conquered the Idumeans, a non-Jewish people who lived to the south of Judea, and forced them to accept Judaism.) 
The present Western liberal tradition considers such forced conversions in any direction to be abhorrent, but the Elizabethans would not find it so. To force a Jew to turn Christian was, in their view, a crowning mercy, since it rescued him from the certainty of hell and placed him on the route to salvation. Many in the Elizabethan audience may well have thought Antonio was being entirely too softhearted, and it is not impossible to suppose that Shakespeare himself wanted to do Shylock this favor out of a sneaking affection for this full-rounded villain he had managed to create. After all, Marlowe had given his Jew in The Jew of Malta an unrepentant and horrible death. 


Ö renew old Aeson




After the tension of the trial, there is a final act of idyllic happiness back in Belmont, where Lorenzo and Jessica are continuing their blissful honeymoon. The night is glorious and they hymn it alternately in classical allusion to sad and tragic loves, as a delicious contrast to their own happy one. 
Lorenzo says:


Ö in such a night

Troilus methinks mounted the Troyan walls,

And sighed his soul toward the Grecian tents

Where Cressid lay that night.





óAct V, scene i, lines 3-6 


The tale of Troilus and Cressida was handled by Shakespeare five years after the writing of The Merchant of Venice (see page I-71 ff). Jessica responds: 


In such a night

Did Thisbe fearfully o'ertrip the dew,

And saw the lion's shadow ere himself,

And ran dismayed away.





óAct V, scene i, lines 6-9 


Shakespeare had treated the tale of Pyramus and Thisbe, in burlesque form, a year or two earlier in A Midsummer Night's Dream (see page I-48). 
Lorenzo says: 


In such a night

Stood Dido with a willow in her hand

Upon the wild sea banks, and wait her love

To come again to Carthage.





óAct V, scene i, lines 9-12 


The sad tale of Dido and Aeneas (see page I-20) is one of Shakespeare's favorites. 
But then Jessica comes up with an allusion that doesn't fit at all. She says: 


In such a night

Medea gathered the enchanted herbs

That did renew old Aeson.





óAct V, scene i, lines 12-14 


Medea was the archetype of the powerful witch in Grecian myth, a woman of passionate desires who would stop at no crime to gratify them. She was the daughter of Aeetes, to whose guardianship the Golden Fleece (see page I-161) was entrusted. When Jason and his companions came searching for it, she fell in love with Jason and betrayed her father. She returned to Jason's kingdom with him and, according to one tale, restored the youth of Jason's old father, Aeson, by the use of her enchantments. 
Medea might be included in the list of tragic loves because Jason tired of her eventually and abandoned her. In rage, she killed her own children by the faithless Jason. Still, it is odd that Jessica should refer to the tale of a woman who betrayed her father for her lover and who was regarded not as a heroine by the Greeks but as a villainess, and who came to so bad an end besides. Might we argue that Shakespeare's sneaking sympathy for Shy-lock shows itself here yet again? 


Ö like an angel sings




Lorenzo and Jessica are interrupted by messengers reporting that Portia and Nerissa on one hand and Bassanio and Gratiano on the other are returning. (They are arriving separately; the young men don't know even yet that their wives were at the trial in masculine guise.) Yet Lorenzo cannot bear to leave the night. He says: 


Sit, Jessica. Look how the floor of heaven

Is thick inlaid with patens of bright gold.

There's not the smallest orb which thou behold'si

But in his motion like an angel sings,

Still [always] quiring to the young-eyed cherubins;

Such harmony is in immortal souls,

But whilst this muddy vesture of decay

Doth grossly close it in, we cannot hear it.





óAct V, scene i, lines 58-65 


This notion of the "music of the spheres" (see page I-199), first advanced by Pythagoras, was still extant in Shakespeare's time. The great German astronomer Johann Kepler tried to figure out the exact notes being sounded by the various planets. This was done just about the time Shakespeare was writing The Merchant of Venice. Could Shakespeare have heard about it and could he have been inspired by it to write this lyrical passage? 


Ö sleeps with Endymion




Portia, returning, is also captivated by the night, saying: 


Ö the moon sleeps with Endymion,

And would not be awaked.





óAct V, scene i, lines 109-10 


Endymion, in the Greek myths, was a handsome prince who, asleep in a cave one night, was spied by Selene, goddess of the moon. Ravished by his beauty, she descended to the cave and kissed the sleeping youth. She wanted no more and, throwing him into a magic, eternal slumber, she returned night after night to kiss him and sleep awhile by his side. 


Ö like Argus




Portia has returned home before her husband and gives orders that no one is to reveal the fact she has been away at all. She is ready for the last complication of the play. 
After Antonio had been saved, Bassanio, in gratitude, had offered the young judge (whom he did not recognize to be his wife) some reward. She would take nothing but the ring which Portia had given him and which he had sworn not to surrender. Reluctantly, Bassanio (recognizing his debt to Antonio) gave up the ring. Doubling the fun, Nerissa made Gratiano give up his ring too. 
(Surely one must see the contrast with Shylock, who would not have given up his wife's ring for anything.) 
When Bassanio and Gratiano come, bringing Antonio with them, the women at once ask for the rings. Naturally, they refuse to believe their husbands' explanations and pretend to be sure the rings were given to other women. 
Portia, in particular, swears that if Bassanio did give her ring to some man, as he says, then she would take that man for her bedmate. She says: 


Watch me like Argus. If you do not, if I be left alone-

Now by mine honor which is yet mine own,

I'll have that doctor for mine bedfellow.





óAct V, scene i, lines 230-33 


(Of course she will. If she is alone, she will sleep with herself as the only person in the bed.) 
Argus was a giant in Greek mythology, whose special monstrous attribute was a hundred eyes, some of which were always open (see page I-86). 
But then, before the quarrel can grow more fierce than suffices to amuse the audience, the truth is revealed, Lorenzo and Jessica learn they will be Shylock's heirs, and all ends in a blaze of happiness. 








19. Much Ado About Nothing


Much ado about nothing is among the pleasantest of Shakespeare's plays. It was written about 1599 and is the first of a cluster of three comedies, written in the space of a year or so, that represent Shakespeare's comic genius at its height. 


Ö Don Pedro of Aragon Ö




The play opens with Leonato, the governor of Messina, speaking with a Messenger who has just brought him a letter. Leonato says: 


I learn in this letter that Don Pedro of Aragon

comes this night to Messina.





óAct I, scene i, lines 1-2 


Messina is one of the principal cities of the island of Sicily. It is located in the northeastern comer of that triangular island just at the narrow strait that separates Sicily from Italy. As for Aragon, that is a medieval kingdom that was located in eastern Spain (see page I-526). 
But what was Don Pedro of Aragon doing in Sicily? 
Well, through much of the Middle Ages Sicily had been ruled by the German emperors. In 1266, however, it fell into the hands of the French dynasty of Anjou. 
In 1282 the Sicilians grew tired of this Angevin rule. On March 30, just as the church bells were ringing for the sunset prayers called vespers, the Sicilians rose in concert and killed every Frenchman they could find. This event, the "Sicilian Vespers," ended Angevin rule on the island. 
The last German ruler of Sicily, prior to the advent of the Angevins, had had only one surviving child, a daughter. She had married the King of Aragon, and the Sicilians considered this Aragonese King to be the natural successor to the crown. They Invited him to come to Sicily. He did so and by 1285 had established himself firmly as ruler of Sicily, beginning a dynasty that was to continue for over five hundred years. 
The Aragonese King who took over in Sicily was Pedro III (also known as Pedro the Great). Naturally, he was not the Don Pedro of Aragon who figures in Much Ado About Nothing, a play which is completely and entirely unhistorical. Undoubtedly, however, it was his name that floated into Shakespeare's mind when he needed one for the prince. 


Ö a young FlorentineÖ




It is quickly established that there has been a battle which Don Pedro has won and which has been practically bloodless. Leonato says: 


/ find here that Don Pedro hath bestowed

much honor on a young Florentine called Claudio.





óAct I, scene i, lines 9-11 


Florence was the leading city of Renaissance Italy, the medieval analogue of ancient Athens. Shakespeare never set the scene of one of his plays in that city, but he knew its reputation and worth. Simply by making Claudio a Florentine he was informing the audience that the man was intelligent and gallant. 


Ö of Padua




Leonato has a daughter, Hero, beautiful and shy, and a niece named Beatrice, merry and impudent. The latter is trying to make herself heard and finally manages to say: 


I pray you, is Signior Mountanto

returned from the wars or no?





óAct I, scene i, lines 29-30 


Mountanto is the name of a style of fencing thrust and the implication is that the gentleman in question is a great swashbuckler, presumably a phony, whose valor is all talk. 
The Messenger doesn't know whom she means and her cousin, Hero, must identify him, saying: 


My cousin means Signior Benedick of Padua.





óAct I, scene i, line 34 


Padua is the scene of much of the action of The Taming of the Shrew (see page I-447). The Messenger assures the company that Benedick is alive and well, and Beatrice breaks out at once in a flood of slander against him. Leonato feels it necessary to explain this away and says to the Messenger: 


You must not, sir, mistake my niece.

There is a kind of merry war betwixt

Signior Benedick and her. They never meet

but there's a skirmish of wit between them.





óAct I, scene i, lines 58-61 


And indeed, it is this "merry war" that is the heart of the play and that will keep it alive and popular forever. 


Ö my dear Lady Disdain Ö




In come the warriors, including Don Pedro, Claudio, and Benedick. There is a gracious and good-humored conversation with Leonato in the course of which Benedick carefully manages to fail to see Beatrice. 
Finally, Beatrice is forced to address him and says: 


1 wonder that you will still [always] be talking,

Signior Benedick; nobody marks [listens to] you.





óAct I, scene i, lines 112-13 


Whereupon in the most lordly way possible, Benedick turns, looks at the lady with a vague surprise, and says: 


What, my dear Lady Disdain!

Are you yet living?





óAct I, scene i, lines 114-15 


And the battle is joined. 


Ö the Prince your brother. ..




But not quite all is merry. Among the party is a sour-visaged gentleman who has thus far said nothing. Leonato greets him too, and says: 


Let me bid you welcome, my lord;

being reconciled to the Prince your brother,

I owe you all duty.





óAct I, scene i, lines 149-51 


He is speaking to Don John, the Prince's illegitimate brother, who has apparently been in rebellion against Don Pedro. In fact, that was what the battle was about. Don John lost, apparently ignominiously, with Claudio particularly notable on the winning side, and the loser has had to reconcile himself with his brother. No wonder he looks so sour. 
Nothing of this is historical, but Shakespeare may well have thought of the name because King Philip II of Spain (who died only a year or so before Much Ado About Nothing was written and who had ruled Sicily) had happened to have an illegitimate brother widely known as Don John of Austria. 
The historical Don John was, to be sure, nothing at all like the Don John of the play and had never rebelled against his brother. In fact, the historical Don John is best known for his victory over the Turks at the Battle of Lepanto and then for his death, not long afterward, at the age of thirty-one in 1578. 


Ö possessed with a fury. ..




Claudio has fallen in love with Hero and as is natural for a lover, he wants his friend, Benedick, to praise her. Benedick, a very sensible young man, refuses to be poetic about it. He says: 


There's her cousin, and she were not possessed with a fury,

exceeds her as much in beauty

as the first of May doth the last of December.





óAct I, scene i, lines 184-86 


The Furies were creatures of Greek legend who were vengeful spirits that pursued those guilty of great crimes, and were probably personifications of the madness that stemmed from guilt and remorse. It is clear, though, that despite Benedick's unkind characterization of Beatrice he is very much struck by her-and we might guess that Beatrice wouldn't take so much trouble to tongue-lash Benedick if she weren't equally struck by him. 
In short, the two are in love and everyone in the play and in the audience knows it-except for Beatrice and Benedick themselves. 


Ö called Adam




Don Pedro is on Claudio's side, however, and the two of them then proceed to tease Benedick over his confirmed bachelorhood. They assure him he will fall in love and marry someday, and Benedick swears mightily that he won't, saying:


// / do, hang me in a bottle like a cat

and shoot at me; and he that hits me,

let him be clapped on the shoulder

and called Adam.





óAct I, scene i, lines 248-50 


The reference is to a north English ballad, famous in Shakespeare's time, concerning three master archers who lived in a forest in the extreme north of England. These were Clym of the dough, William of Cloudesly, and Adam Bell, and any of the three might be used as a way of signifying a champion archer. In this case, it is Adam who gets the nod. 


"Ö Benedick the married man"




Finally, Benedick's protestations reach a climax and succeed in adding a word to the language. He says that if he ever gets married, they can make a sign on which he is to be caricatured and 


let them signify under my sign

"Here you may see Benedick the married man."





óAct I, scene i, lines 257-58 


"Benedick" is but a slightly corrupt form of "Benedict," and either is now used with a small letter (a benedict) to signify sometimes a bachelor, sometimes a married man. The most appropriate use, however, is for a long-time bachelor who is newly married. 


Ö his quiver in Venice




Benedick's companions are not impressed and feel that he will pay for his scorning of love. Don Pedro warns him laughingly: 


Ö if Cupid have not spent all his quiver in Venice,

thou wilt quake for this shortly.





óAct I, scene i, lines 261-62 


Venice, as a great trading center (see page I-499), would be crowded with sailors from all lands, eager for the use of women after the Spartan life aboard ship, and the city would therefore be considered a center of sexual license.


Ö born under SaturnÖ




All is going along marvelously well. Don Pedro promises to use his influence to see to it that Claudio and Hero get married. Leonato learns of it and is delighted. 
There is only one exception. Don John, the defeated brother, is miserable. His companion, Conrade, tries to cheer him up, but fails. Don John is even surprised that Conrade should try. He says: 


/ wonder that thou being

(as thou say'st thou art)born under Saturn,

goest about to apply a moral medicineÖ





óAct I, scene iii, lines 10-12 


In astrological thinking, each person is considered as having been born under the influence of a particular planet, which governs his personality in some fashion related to its own properties. 
Mercury is the fastest moving of the planets, and to be "mercurial" is to be gay, volatile, and changeable. 
Venus, named for the goddess of love, is related to "venereal," which can mean loving or lustful. The word has fallen out of use because of its association with diseases such as syphilis. 
Mars, the ruddy planet named for the god of war, has an obvious connection with "martial." 
Jupiter (Jove) is the second brightest of the planets and is named for the chief of the gods. It is considered most fortunate to be born under it and to be "jovial" is to be merry, good-natured, and sociable. 
Saturn is considered to produce effects opposite to those of Jupiter. It is the slowest moving of the planets and is named for a particularly ancient god. Those born under his influence are therefore "saturnine," that is, grave, gloomy, and slow. Don John himself is portrayed as a saturnine individual. 
The name "Conrade" has a connection with Sicily, by the way. The last of the German emperors to rule as King of Sicily was Conrad IV, who reigned from 1250 to 1254. His son, Conradin, attempted to retain hold over Sicily but was defeated and beheaded in 1268 by Charles of Anjou, who set up the Angevin dynasty that was to end fourteen years later in the Sicilian Vespers. 
But another of Don John's companions, Borachio, comes in with the news that a match is being arranged between Claudio and Hero. Don John brightens. He feels a particular hate for Claudio, who was so prominent in the battle that defeated Don John, and if some mischief can be worked up at the young man's expense, so much the better.


Ö apes into hell




Leonato is planning a masked dance that night as an amusement for the royal company he is hosting, and during the preparations, Beatrice is her usual merry self, as busily denying she will have a husband as Benedick had earlier been denying he would have a wife. She even looks forward, with some cheer, to the traditional punishment Elizabethans imagined for old maids. She will not marry and 


Therefore I will even take sixpence

in earnest of the berrord

and lead his apes into hell.





óAct II, scene i, lines 39-41 


The "berrord" is the "bearward" or animal keeper. She will accept a com from him as wages and do a job for him, which is to lead his apes into hell (see page I-454). 


Ö Philemon's roof.. .




Don Pedro intends to take the occasion of the masked ball to smooth Claudio's path to Hero. He will dance with Hero, pretending to be Claudio. Drawing her to one side, and speaking more gallantly than Claudio himself might be able to, he will win her love for his friend. 
When Don Pedro dances with Hero, she naturally tries to find out who is under the mask, and he says: 


My visor is Philemon's roof;

within the house is Jove.




óAct II, scene i, lines 95-96 


This refers to a tale told in Ovid's Metamorphoses (see page I-8). 
Jupiter (Jove) and Mercury once traveled through Asia Minor in disguise to test the hospitality of its inhabitants. They were treated discourteously everywhere until they came to the lowly cottage of an old, poor couple, Philemon and Baucis. Their welcome there was so hospitable that they offered to grant the couple whatever their wish might be. Their only wish was that they might die together, without warning, at the same moment, so that neither should know one moment of the pain of living without the other. It was granted. 
Don Pedro, in referring to himself as Jove, may be tempted at the moment to speak for himself rather than for Claudio. Indeed, Don John, for sheer mischief, will take the occasion soon to get the news to Claudio that Don Pedro had indeed spoken for himself (though, in the end, he did not).


Ö the "Hundred Merry Tales"Ö




Benedick dances with Beatrice at the ball and, under the cover of anonymity, tells her of certain anonymous slanders he has heard concerning her. She repeats the information and guesses the informer, saying: 


That I was disdainful,

and that I had my good wit

out of the "Hundred Merry Tales."

Well, this was Signior Benedick that said so.





óAct II, scene i, lines 128-30 


The "Hundred Merry Tales" was a popular, and therefore well-worn, collection of funny stories, most of them coarse. It would be equivalent, in modern terms, to saying that she had gotten her witty sayings out of Joe Miller's joke book. 
It was a deadly thing to say to Beatrice and in vengeance (she probably knew very well with whom she was dancing) she floods Benedick with cruel remarks which he cannot counter. 


Ö the infernal Ate.. .




Benedick has so much the worse of it on this occasion that after the dance he boils over with frustration, and says to Don Pedro concerning Beatrice: 


She would have made Hercules have turned spit,

yea, and have cleft his club to make the fire too.

Come, talk not of her.

You shall find her the infernal Ate in good apparel.





óAct II, scene i, lines 250-54 


She is such a shrew, in other words, that even Hercules would bow before her in fear. 
As a matter of fact, the image is not too far removed from one of the legends concerning Hercules. As a punishment for some crime, Hercules was condemned to serve Omphale, Queen of Libya, for three years. She chose to have him do the woman's work about the house, spinning, cleaning, making beds, while she wore his lion's skin and carried his club. 
As for Ate, she is the Greek goddess of vengeance and mischief, who created so much trouble even among the gods that she was cast out of heaven and condemned to live on earth, where, Benedick implies, she has taken on the likeness of Beatrice.


Ö the great Cham's beardÖ




And when Beatrice enters, Benedick bounds to his feet at once and demands to be sent away. He says to Don Pedro melodramatically: 


Will your Grace command me any service

to the world's end?I will go on

the slightest errand now to the Antipodes

that you can devise to send me on;

I will fetch you a toothpicker now

from the furthest inch of Asia;

bring you the length of Prester John's foot;

fetch you a hair off the great Cham's beard;

do you any embassage to the Pygmies-rather

than hold three words' conference with this harpy.





óAct II, scene i, lines 261-69 


The Antipodes ("with the feet pointed opposite") is a term invented by the Greeks. When their philosophers worked out the fact that the earth was spherical, there appeared at once the odd and paradoxical situation that people might live on the other side of the earth, with their feet pointed upward (from the standpoint of the Greeks). 
Since the temperature rose as one went south, some Greek philosophers suggested there was a burning zone about the equator that men could not pass and that the world of the Antipodes (the Southern Hemisphere) could never be reached. 
(By Shakespeare's time this was shown to be false, but the Antipodes remained as a symbol of the distant and unattainable.) 
Prester John ("John the Priest") was a mythical monarch whose existence was widely accepted in the later Middle Ages. He was supposed to be a Christian king of immense power, with wide dominions in Asia, a king who had conquered the pagan regions and converted them to Christianity (hence his title). 
There were indeed Christians in the Far East. These were the Nestorian Christians, a heretical sect that had been driven out of the East Roman Empire in the fifth century and had found haven in Persia and beyond. They penetrated to central Asia and China and, for a while in the twelfth century, were influential among the Mongol tribes who were gaining power. 
In 1145 a Syrian bishop, Hugh of Gebal, brought the tale to the papal court. He spoke of a great Christian monarch in the East, thus combining a Mongol conqueror (who was not a Christian) with the Nestorians (who were not kings). In 1177 Pope Alexander III wrote a letter to this supposed Prester John, suggesting an alliance against the Moslems. The messenger carrying the letter never returned and nothing is known of his fate. Nevertheless, people continued to believe in the myth of a great Christian empire somewhere beyond the horizon. 
In 1206 the greatest of the Mongols took the name of Genghis Khan, and he proved a Prester John indeed, though not a Christian one. For a bloody and unbelievable half century the Mongols expanded with unheard-of speed and built the largest continuous land empire the world had yet seen. In 1240 they even penetrated central Europe, defeating all armies sent against them. 
Under Kublai Khan, the grandson of Genghis Khan, they reached their height. In the late thirteenth century the Italian traveler Marco Polo spent seventeen years at the court of Kublai Khan and thereafter wrote an immensely popular account of his travels. The memory of the Khans (or Chams) remained green, therefore, and it is the beard of the Mongol ruler which Benedick offers to pluck (though by Shakespeare's time only remnants of the Mongol Empire remained). 
The Pygmies were a dwarfish race first mentioned in Homer's Iliad, and were reputed to live south of Egypt (see page I-63). The Harpies, in Greek legend, were originally symbols of the storm wind, but they were eventually pictured as winged birds of prey with women's heads. They were described as horrible, filthy creatures that snatched food away from men's tables, soiling and fouling what they could not take. 


Ö like favorites




Having said all this, Benedick stalks off in a huff, to Beatrice's amusement. The rest of the group are happy too, as it quickly turns out that Don Pedro has wooed on his friend's behalf, and successfully. Soon there will be a wedding between Claudio and Hero. 
Don Pedro, having listened to Benedick and Beatrice berate each other, suddenly thinks it would be delightful to trick them into falling in love. It is quite obvious to everyone that they are actually in love and it is just necessary to find some face-saving way of getting each to admit it 
Don Pedro, Leonato, and Claudio therefore seize an opportunity when Benedick is within earshot, to pretend they don't know they are being overheard, and to begin a long, circumstantial tale about Beatrice being in love with Benedick and being afraid to show it. They say that she may die of it. 
Benedick is quite incredulous at first, but the three are most convincing, and, in his heart, he wants to believe, of course. So it comes about that he decides he can't very well let the poor girl die and he might as well save her life by loving her. 
Next, Beatrice must get the same treatment. Hero and a lady in waiting, Ursula, will talk in the garden and Beatrice will be lured there to overhear them. Hero gives directions, saying that the talk will be in a shady place where the plants


Forbid the sun to enter-like favorites,

Made proud by princes, that advance their pride,

Against that power that bred it,





óAct III, scene i, lines 9-11 


Considering the year in which the play was written, this sounds like an unmistakable reference to the Earl of Essex (see page I-120), who had been the favorite of Queen Elizabeth and who was now falling out of favor and taking it hard. Soon he was to attempt rebellion against the Queen and be beheaded for his pains. 
Shakespeare was patronized by Essex and was surely sympathetic to him (see page I-119). In fact, there is every reason to suppose he did not forgive Elizabeth for executing the Earl, and when Queen Elizabeth died he remained mute, something spitefully noted by the poet Henry Chettle, who wrote an elegy in the dead monarch's honor. 
And yet here is this passage in Much Ado About Nothing. We might suppose that Shakespeare, not one to risk his neck, or his living either, fearful that his connection with Essex might bring harm down upon his head, inserted this passage as an indication of disapproval of Essex. Such an indication might place him on the right side and out of trouble. 
The girls' stratagem works and Beatrice is tricked into love out of pity, just as Benedick was. 


Ö they that touch pitchÖ




Everything is going better and better, but there is Don John even yet His earlier bit of mischief had miscarried and he wants something more effective. His companion, Borachio, has an idea. Why not frame Hero? He can arrange things so that he himself will woo Hero's lady in waiting Margaret at Hero's window. Don Pedro and Claudio will be allowed to overhear and be made to believe that Hero is a creature of light behavior who bestows her favors on anyone. 
This vile plot is carried through offstage and works, but almost at once the nemesis of the plotters appears in the shape of comic constables, who mangle the English language with every sentence. 
Their chief is Dogberry, epitome of the cowardly policeman who is willing to make an arrest only if there is no risk in it. Thus, when asked by a watchman whether they may arrest any thieves they encounter, Dogberry prudently says: 


Truly, by your office you may;

but I think they that touch pitch will be defiledÖ





óAct III, scene iii, lines 57-58


The proverb is biblical; at least it occurs in the apocryphal Book of Ecclesiasticus (13:1), where it is written: "He that toucheth pitch shall be defiled therewith," an analogy that warns against evil companionship. 


Ö a true drunkard.. .




Two newly sworn watchmen remain behind and almost at once Conrade and Borachio enter. Borachio, having successfully carried through the plot, is bubbling over with glee because he has earned a thousand ducats from Don John as a result. Borachio says to Conrade: 


Stand thee close then under this penthouse

for it drizzles rain, and I will,

like a true drunkard, utter all to thee.





óAct III, scene iii, lines 104-6 


It is to be presumed that Don John's companions are Aragonese and speak Spanish. Shakespeare makes no point of it in the play but Bora-chio's reference to himself as a drunkard is interesting, since the Spanish word borracho means just that. 


Ö god Bel's priests.. .




Borachio is triumphant over the ease with which appearance was mistaken for reality (Margaret at the window for Hero). Through him, Shakespeare strikes out at one of his favorite targets-changing fashion. Borachio denounces fashion for making mankind ridiculous: 


Sometimes fashioning them

like Pharaoh's soldiers in the reechy [grimy]

painting, sometimes like god Bel's priests in the old church window,

sometimes like the shaven Hercules in the smirched worm-eaten tapestryÖ





óAct III, scene iii, lines 134-38 


The new fashions only succeed, in other words, in making men look like one variety or another of ancient figures so that those fashions don't even have the virtue of being really new. 
The reference to "Bel's priests" brings in another apocryphal book of the Bible. In this case it is Bel and the Dragon, in which the prophet Daniel proved to King Cyrus of Persia that the idol Bel was merely an inanimate object. The priests of Bel pretended that the idol consumed food and wine brought to it by the faithful each day, and Daniel showed that it was the priests themselves who ate and drank.


Ö Count Comfect.. .




The watchmen abandon Dogberry's caution and, like valiant men, promptly arrest Conrade and Borachio. Dogberry and his chief assistant, the aged Verges, go to Leonato to acquaint him with the conspiracy against his daughter. Between their wordiness and Leonato's haste to be on with the wedding preparations, communication fails and the plot, which ought to have been scotched, is not. 
At the wedding ceremony, Claudio, in the most brutal manner, scornfully refuses to accept Hero, accusing her of immorality. Sadly, Don Pedro confirms this. 
Leonato is half convinced, Benedick is puzzled and confused, and Hero faints. Beatrice, of course, is instantly and entirely on the side of Hero. 
The Friar, who had been performing the marriage ceremony, suggests (very much in the manner of Friar Laurence in Romeo and Juliet) that the family pretend Hero is dead till the matter can be straightened out. Her supposed death will produce remorse in Claudio and Don Pedro and make them the readier to accept her innocence if the evidence points to it; while if she turns out to be really guilty, her supposed death would hide her shame and make it easier to have her quietly put in a nunnery. 
Beatrice, furious, is in no mood, however, for lengthy investigations. She wants direct action. Poor Benedick, confessing his love for her, can scarcely get two words out at a time. Beatrice rages her contempt for Don Pedro and Claudio. She says: 


Princes and counties!

Surely, a princely testimony, a goodly count.

Count Comfect; a sweet gallant surely!





óAct IV, scene i, lines 313-15 


"Comfect" is candy (as in our modern "confectionary"), and Beatrice is sneering at the fault manliness of those who could treat a young girl so cruelly. 
Beatrice has only one small demand of Benedict; that he kill Claudio. Benedick doesn't want to, but he cannot stand against Beatrice's impetuous fire; gloomily, he goes off to challenge Claudio. 


Ö a calf's head and a capon Ö




Quietly Benedick challenges Claudio to a duel, out of the hearing of Don Pedro. Claudio, however, can scarcely take his old, bantering friend seriously. He insists on thinking it is some sort of joke and says to Don Pedro (who has overheard the conversation imperfectly and asks if Claudio is being invited to dinner): 


Ö he hath bid me to a calf's head and a capon;

the which if I do not carve most curiously,

say my knife's naught.

Shall I not find a woodcock, too?





óAct V, scene i, lines 153-56 


They are all items of food; but calves, capons, and woodcocks are all common symbols of stupidity too. Claudio is still wondering if Benedick is advancing some stupid joke. But Benedick insists on being grim, and stalks off after insulting Claudio unmistakably and formally leaving the service of Don Pedro. 
The plot is breaking down, however. Not only does Benedick inform Don Pedro that his brother, Don John, has fled Messina (a suspicious act made necessary, presumably, by the arrest of Conrade and Borachio), but the foolish Dogberry has managed to extract a confession from the villains. 
When the truth is out, Don Pedro and Claudio are prostrate with remorse and guilt. Leonato demands a simple recompense; that Claudio marry a niece of his that looks very much like the supposedly dead Hero. In deep contrition, Claudio agrees at once, and, of course, the "niece" turns out to be Hero herself. All are reconciled, right down to Claudio and Benedick. 


Ö all Europa. ..




Now it is Benedick's turn. He will marry soon and subject himself to the dangers of the horns of cuckoldry after all. Claudio laughingly says: 


Tush, fear not, man! We'll tip thy horns with gold,

And all Europa shall rejoice at thee,

As once Europa did at lusty Jove

When he would play the noble beast in love.





óAct V, scene iv, lines 44-47 


There is a play on words here between Europa, meaning the continent of Europe, and Europa, the princess whom Jove loved in the shape of a bull (see page I-44).


.. .in a consumption






It comes out now that both Beatrice and Benedick had fallen in love because each had been told the other was lovesick, but it no longer matters. Benedick saves face by saying:


Come, I will have thee; but, by this light,

I take thee for pity.





óAct V, scene iv, lines 92-93 


And Beatrice answers (as usual) with interest: 


Ö by this good day, I yield upon great persuasion,

and partly to save your life, for

I was told you were in a consumption.





óAct V, scene iv, lines 94-96 


With that, they kiss and are clearly blissfully happy. And we may presume that the marriage will stay happy too. No doubt the "merry war" between them will continue and Beatrice' sharp tongue will continue to have the better of it, but what of that? 
After all, "Beatrice" means "she who makes happy" and "Benedick" means "blessed," and Shakespeare could not have chosen those names accidentally. Beatrice will make Benedick happy and he will be blessed in her. 
The play ends with the news that Don John has been caught, but punishment is deferred for the next day. Nothing will interfere with the gaiety of the end. 








20. As You Like It


As you like it seems to have been written about 1599, a little after Much Ado About Nothing, and is therefore the second of the cluster of Shakespeare's three joyous comedies.
In this second comedy, much of the action takes place in an idealized pastoral setting, something very popular in the period. The plot Shakespeare obtained from a pastoral romance, Rosalynd, published in 1590 by the English poet Thomas Lodge, and unproved it beyond measure. 


Ö eat husks with them. ..




The story opens with Orlando and the old servant, Adam, onstage. Orlando is the youngest of three sons. His dead father has left him but a small sum for himself and has placed his bringing up in charge of the oldest brother, Oliver. 
Though Oliver supports the middle brother in school, he is (for some reason Shakespeare does not bother to explain) a jealous tyrant to his youngest brother, keeping him deliberately in idleness and penury. When Oliver comes onstage, young Orlando says to him bitterly: 


Shall I keep your hogs and eat husks with them?

What prodi gal portion have I spent that

I should come to such penury?





óAct I, scene i, lines 36-38 


This is a reference to the famous parable of the prodigal son in the Gospel of St. Luke (see page II-368). 


Ö the old DukeÖ




The two brothers nearly come to blows and Orlando demands the small sum coming to him so that he might leave. Oliver agrees, with ill grace, but it is in his mind to be rid of Orlando forever and without paying him any money either.
Charles, a wrestler at the court of the Duke, is there to speak to Oliver, and it is this wrestler who is to be the means whereby Oliver will carry out his plan. Charles, asked after court news, says: 


There's no news at the court, sir, but the old news.

That is, the old Duke is banished by his younger brother,

the new Duke Ö





óAct I, scene i, lines 96-98 


Who these dukes might be, and over what region they might rule, Shakespeare does not say and, certainly, does not care. In Lodge's pastoral romance, the dead father of the young hero was called Sir John of Bordeaux. That would make the scene the southwestern section of France. And indeed, the wrestler (here called Charles) is, in the source romance, serving at the court of Torismund, King of France. There was once a Toris-mund, who ruled the Germanic tribe of the Visigoths in 451, and that tribe did, indeed, control at that time southwestern France. 
In Shakespeare's version, the father of Oliver and Orlando is Rowland de Boys. "Rowland" is a form of "Roland" and that name is best known as that of a Frankish warrior who died at the Battle of Roncesvalles in 778, which was fought in the Pyrenees about 130 miles south of Bordeaux. This is reminiscent of the time and place of Torismund. 
That, however, is as far as it goes. The King of France is changed by Shakespeare into a Duke who is not further characterized or even named. (He is called Duke Senior in the play.) The usurping younger brother is named Frederick. 


Ö the Forest of Arden Ö




Charles goes on to say of the exiled Duke: 


They say he is already in the Forest of Arden,

and a many merry men with him; and there they live like the old Robin Hood of England.

They say many young gentlemen flock to him every day,

and fleet the time carelessly as they did in the golden world.





óAct I, scene i, lines 111-15 


If we imagine a French setting, the Forest of Arden would be the wooded region of Ardennes, straddling the modern boundary between France and southern Belgium. There is, however, an actual Forest of Arden just north of Shakespeare's birthplace, Stratford-on-Avon, and the dramatist must surely have had this at least partly in mind.
In the Forest of Arden, Duke Senior and his men are living the life of happy outlaws, in the midst of nature, eating the game they capture and not having a care in the world. This is the bucolic bliss that is conventional in pastorals, for it is common for people trapped in the hurly-burly of the crowded haunts of men to imagine (wrongly) that there is some special delight in a simple life that existed in the "good old days." 
This vain imagining even made its way into many mythologies. The early Greek poet Hesiod pictured the human race as having degenerated through successive ages, each worse than the one before. The first period was the "golden age," in which men lived without care, eating acorns, honey, and milk, free of hunger and pain; to these men death was only a falling asleep. It is to this that Charles refers as "the golden world." 
To the English audience, the best-known example of happy outlaws in the forest was that of Robin Hood and his band of merry men. He was originally a peasant outlaw fighting against the Norman overlords, but with time he was polished up and made more acceptable to the aristocracy. By Shakespeare's time he had been transmuted into a Norman nobleman, Robert, Earl of Huntingdon, who was unjustly dispossessed and outlawed. The resemblance between this version of Robin Hood and the case of Duke Senior makes Charles's reference a natural one. 


Ö the little wit. ..




Charles has come to warn Oliver that it is rumored his youngest brother, Orlando, will try to wrestle him. Charles gives troubled warning that he will be forced to hurt Orlando. Oliver, however, callously urges Charles to kill Orlando rather than merely hurt him. 
The scene then shifts to the court, where we find the two charming young cousins, Rosalind and Celia. Rosalind is the daughter of the exiled Duke, and Celia the daughter of the usurping one. Rosalind is kept at court, despite her father's exile, because Celia loves her so. 
Celia endeavors to keep her cousin cheerful and in this is helped by the court fool, who is named Touchstone. This is a particularly significant name, for a touchstone is a hard, flinty rock upon which a soft metal like gold will leave a rubbed-off mark if drawn across it. Pure gold and gold alloyed with varying amounts of copper can be used to make reference marks of different shades of yellow, orange, and red. If an unknown gold alloy is then rubbed across the touchstone, the mark it leaves, when compared with the standards, will reveal the amount of the copper content. As a result, "touchstone" has come to mean any criterion or standard against which the qualities of something may be tested. 
To have a fool named Touchstone, then, is to indicate that it is by the encounter with the wit of a fool that the wisdom of a man may be judged.
Thus, when cautioned about the too great freedom of his remarks, Touchstone says to the girls: 


The more pity that fools may not speak

wisely what wise men do foolishly.





óAct I, scene ii, lines 83-84 


To this, Celia responds: 


By my troth, thou sayest true, for since the little wit

that fools have was silenced, the little foolery

that wise men have makes a great show.





óAct I, scene ii, lines 85-87 


This remark has nothing to do with anything in the play and it would seem that Shakespeare was seizing the opportunity to make a cutting reference to some contemporary event. The satiric writing of Elizabethan times had grown more and more scurrilous until those jabbed at by it managed to push the government into banning such satires on June 1, 1599. Censorship, nevertheless, is almost invariably a greater evil than those it tries to cure, and Shakespeare expresses his disapproval of it here. 


Ö is humorous




The young ladies learn of the wrestling matches and of the apparent invincibility of Charles. Orlando is now there to take his turn at the wrestling, and both girls, but especially Rosalind, are greatly taken with his youth and good looks. 
All try to persuade Orlando not to wrestle, but he insists, and to everyone's surprise throws Charles and badly hurts him. Duke Frederick wants to know the young victor's name and is put out to find he is a son of Sir Rowland de Boys, an old enemy of his. 
Later a courtier comes back to warn Orlando to leave quickly: 


Ö such is now the Duke's condition

That he misconsters [misconstrues] all that you have done.

The Duke is humorous.





óAct I, scene ii, lines 254-56 


The word "humorous" refers to the humors (or body fluids) of the old Greek physicians (see page I-582), which were supposed to control the temperament. To say the Duke is "humorous" is to say that he is a creature of moods and his present mood, apparently, is a dangerous one.


Ö call me Ganymede




The Duke is moody indeed, for he turns against Rosalind also. Having kept her at court ever since her father was exiled, he now bids her leave at once on pain of death, and insists on it despite Celia's wild protests. 
After the Duke stalks offstage, Celia insists that she will flee with Rosalind and that together they will seek Duke Senior in the Forest of Arden. Rosalind is disturbed at the thought of two girls wandering through the wilderness and she suggests that she, at least, dress as a man (Shakespeare's favorite device in his romances). 
Rosalind even takes a name for herself in her guise as man, saying to Celia: 


7'J/ have no worse a name than Jove's own page,

And therefore look you call me Ganymede.





óAct I, scene iii, lines 122-23 


Ganymede, in the Greek myths, was a beautiful Trojan prince (see page I-67) with whom Jupiter (Zeus) fell in love. Since Ganymede was the object of homosexual love, the name is appropriate for a young man who, being really a young lady, is bound to look and behave like an effeminate. 
Celia also chooses a new name, saying to Rosalind that it will be 


Something that hath a reference to my state:

No longer Celia, but Aliena.





óAct I, scene iii, lines 125-26 


"Aliena" is Lathi and is a feminine form of the word meaning "stranger." Celia has become alienated from her father. 
The two girls decide to take Touchstone with them, and leave. 


Ö the penalty of Adam




In the second act the scene shifts to the Forest of Arden, where Duke Senior is contentedly lecturing his followers on the advantages of the simple life: 


Here feel we not the penalty of Adam;





óAct II, scene i, line 5 


For his sin in eating the forbidden fruit, Adam was expelled from the Garden of Eden, where food was always at hand, and was condemned to work for his bread: "In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread" (Genesis 3:19). Here in the Forest of Arden, however, Duke Senior and his men are living on the bounty of the earth and the Garden of Eden (another version of Charles the wrestler's "golden world") is returned. 


Ö like the toadÖ




Duke Senior finds that the cruel fate of exile has turned to good, and says: 


Sweet are the uses of adversity,

Which, like the toad, ugly and venomous,

Wears yet a precious jewel in his head;





óAct II, scene i, lines 12-14 


Toads are ugly indeed, though beneficial (rather than venomous) insofar as they eat insects and help keep the numbers of those creatures under control. There existed a legend, however, that there were stony concretions in toads' heads that could be used to warn against the presence of poison if set in a ring. They did so by changing color. Such a "toad-stone" was also thought to reduce the pain and decrease the swelling that followed the bite or sting of a poisonous animal. Needless to say, despite Shakespeare, there is no such thing as a toadstone. 


Ö caters for the sparrow




But if Duke Senior is contented, poor Orlando certainly is not. Having been warned away from court, he arrives back home only to discover that his oldest brother, Oliver, plans to kill him outright. The warning is brought to Orlando by old Adam, who urges him to leave and offers him his own life savings of five hundred crowns. Adam (who, according to tradition, was played on the stage by Shakespeare himself) says: 


Take that, and he that doth the ravens feed,

Yea, providently caters for the sparrow,

Be comfort to my age.





óAct II, scene iii, lines 43-45 


This is a reference to Jesus' statements "Are not five sparrows sold for two farthings, and not one of them is forgotten before God?" (Luke 12:6) and "Consider the ravens: for they neither sow nor reap; which neither have storehouse nor barn; and God feedeth them" (Luke 12:24).
But Orlando will not abandon old Adam and together they leave home and wander off toward the forest, as earlier Rosalind, Celia, and Touchstone had done. 


Ö the first-born of Egypt




Not everyone in Arden is enamored of the life. One of the Duke Senior's entourage is Jaques, whose affectation it is to be melancholy and to be cynical about everything. He sneers at a beautiful song sung by his fellow courtier Amiens, then says: 


I'll go sleep, if I can; if I cannot,

I'll rail against all the first born of Egypt.





óAct II, scene v, lines 54-55 


A possible meaning for Jaques' remark rests in the fact that the firstborn of Egypt were the victims of the tenth plague brought down upon them by God through Moses. "And it came to pass, that at midnight the Lord smote all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, from the firstborn of Pharaoh that sat on his throne unto the firstborn of the captive that was in the dungeon; and all the firstborn of cattle" (Exodus 12:29). 
It was after this climactic visitation that the Hebrew slaves were finally allowed to leave the country and to make their way into the wilderness. It could be that Jaques is using the phrase "all the first-born of Egypt" to symbolize the events that led to the exile of Duke Senior, and it is this against which he intends to rail. 


Ö the lean and slippered pantaloon




Orlando suddenly bursts in on Duke Senior, Jaques, and the others in wild desperation. Old Adam is too weak with hunger to go farther and Orlando demands food with sword drawn. 
Duke Senior speaks to him gently, and Orlando, realizing he is with friends, goes off to get Adam. When the Duke uses this event to show that there are more tragic scenes on earth than their own, Jaques falls to moralizing on the general uselessness of life and of man's pilgrimage in it. Life, he says, is in seven stages that end in nothing. By the sixth, man is well advanced in age: 


Ö The sixth age shifts

Into the lean and slippered pantaloon,

With spectacles on noseÖ





óAct II, scene vii, lines 157-59 


In Shakespeare's time there had arisen the custom in Italy of having traveling bands of actors give plays in different towns. These bands developed stock characters in standard masks and costumes, and one of the most popular of the stock characters was called Pantaleone. 
The name means "all lion," signifying great bravery (and is Pantaloon in its English version). Naturally it would seem funny to have "all lion," a lecherous, miserly coward, always being outwitted by the young lovers. His characteristic appearance was sufficiently well known to make it unnecessary for Jaques to do more than mention the name. 
Pantaloon was always dressed in baggy trousers, by the way, which came to be called pantaloons in their turn, or, for short, "pants." 


Atalanta's better part




The pastoral life in the Forest of Arden now engulfs our various characters. Touchstone matches wits with the shepherd, Corin, and easily wins. Orlando, with time now to think of the love he has conceived for Rosalind on the occasion of his wrestling match, writes verses concerning her and hangs them on the trees in approved pastoral fashion. 
Rosalind in her disguise as Ganymede finds them. Celia finds them too and is reading one which describes Rosalind as made up of: 


Helen's cheek, but not her heart,

Cleopatra's majesty, A talanta's better part,

Sad Lucretia's modesty.




óAct III, scene ii, lines 145-48 


Three of these four ladies are subjects of Shakespearean plays or poems: Helen in Troilus and Cressida, Cleopatra in Antony and Cleopatra and Lucretia in The Rape of Lucrece. 
As for Atalanta, she was a beautiful girl whose hand was sought by many but who had vowed to live a virgin. She therefore insisted that no one marry her unless he beat her in a foot race and that if he was himself beaten his head was to be chopped off. This frightened many, and the few who risked the race were beaten by the fleet-footed Atalanta and were killed. 
Finally, a youth named Hippomenes prayed to Aphrodite and was given three golden apples. He raced Atalanta and each time she began to forge ahead he threw one of the golden apples before her. Being a woman, each time she paused to pick it up and, thanks to the time she lost, Hippomenes won. 
The reference in the poem, then, is that Rosalind has Atalanta's "better part," the beauty which drew so many to court her, but not the cruelty which killed those who wooed and failed to beat her. Atalanta was a byword for fleetness. Thus, later on Jaques speaks scornfully of Orlando's retorts to his own ill-natured remarks, saying: 


You have a nimble wit. I think

'twas made of Atalanta''s heels.




óAct HI, scene ii, lines 273-74 


Ö an Irish rat Ö




Rosalind is very pleased at all this, but affects indifference, saying: 


I was never so berhymed since

Pythagoras' time that I was an Irish rat. ..




óAct III, scene ii, lines 175-76 


It was Pythagoras' doctrine of the transmigration of souls (see page I-535) that is here being referred to. By it, Rosalind's soul might once have inhabited the body of an Irish rat. 
But what has that to do with rhyming? Well, the Celtic bards of Wales and Ireland were past masters at weaving curses into their improvised poetry. They could use such deadly verses to kill rats and other vermin. Therefore an Irish rat would be most "berhymed." 


Ö Gargantua's mouthÖ




But Celia knows who has written the verses and finally reveals that it is none other than Orlando. The excited Rosalind instantly demands to know everything about it and him and wants all the answers immediately. To which Celia, laughing, says: 


You must borrow me Gargantua's mouth first.. .





óAct III, scene ii, line 223 


Gargantua was a giant of folklore, who was apparently first famous for his enormous appetite, since the name comes from garganta, which is Spanish for gullet. He became best known as a character in a famous satire named for him by the French humorist Frangois Rabelais. That book was first published in 1535.


Ö Jove's tree Ö




Celia says she saw Orlando under an oak tree and Rosalind says: 


It may well be called Jove's tree

when it drops forth such fruit.





óAct III, scene ii, lines 234-35 


The oak tree is sacred to Jupiter. Indeed, the most ancient oracle in Greece was an oak tree in Dodona, in Epirus, two hundred miles northwest of Athens. Plates and other objects of brass were suspended from the branches and these struck together when the wind blew. The sounds were then interpreted by the priests of the shrine and were delivered as oracles. 
Rosalind, in her boy's disguise, manages to find Orlando and cleverly persuades him that if he is to be a truly good lover, he must practice. She offers to play Rosalind and allow nun to woo her in that fashion. (It may possibly have given Shakespeare pleasure to present scenes that were so vividly homosexual and yet done in such a way as to be inoffensive.) 


Ö honest OvidÖ




Touchstone also has fallen in love, and with a goat-herding girl named Audrey. He says to her: 


/ am here with thee and thy goats,

as the most capricious poet, honest Ovid,

was among the Goths.





óAct III, scene iii, lines 6-8 


Ovid had fallen into disgrace with the Emperor Augustus (see page I-389) perhaps because his erotic books spoiled Augustus' efforts to improve the morals of Rome, or because the poet assisted Augustus' dissolute granddaughter, Julia, in some particularly disgraceful intrigue. 
Ovid was therefore exiled to the Black Sea town of Tomi (the present-day port of Constanta in Romania). It was far in the backwoods, among a rustic and backward peasantry, eight hundred miles from Rome. Ovid spent the last nine years of his life there, sending a stream of weepy, self-pitying letters to his family at Rome hoping they would persuade the Emperor to remit the punishment. He never did. 
The inhabitants of Tomi were not Goths, but two centuries later the Goths (a Germanic tribe from the Baltic) had reached the Danube River. Tomi was therefore "among the Goths" in anticipation. 
Not only does Touchstone pun on "goats" and "Goths," but he also calls Ovid capricious, a word which is derived from the Lathi caper, meaning goat.


Dead shepherd.. .




Still another set of lovers is Silvius and Phebe, the conventional shepherd and shepherdess of pastoral tales. In this case, Silvius is desperately in love with Phebe, but Phebe answers only with scorn. 
Rosalind (as Ganymede) undertakes to right matters by scolding Phebe for being so cruel. She only makes matters worse, however, for to Rosalind's horror, Phebe is attracted to her at once in her boy's disguise. When Rosalind leaves, Phebe sighs: 


Dead shepherd, now I find thy saw of might,

"Who ever loved that loved not at first sight?"





óAct III, scene v, lines 81-82 


The line is a quotation from the poem Hero and Leander written by Christopher Marlowe. The poem was published in 1598, a year or so before As You Like It was written, but Marlowe himself had been killed in a tavern brawl in 1593 at the age of twenty-nine. Hence the reference to the "dead shepherd." 


Ö his brains dashed out. ..




Orlando, as agreed, courts Rosalind in her disguise of Ganymede, pretending (and he thinks it is only pretense) that she is Rosalind. Rosalind deliberately eggs him on to avowals of love by pretending great cynicism in the matter. She scouts the notion that lovers would die if refused, saying: 


Troilus had his brains dashed out

with a Grecian club;

yet he did what he could to die before,





óAct IV, scene i, lines 92-94 


Troilus, having been betrayed by his love (see page I-119), had ample reason to die of that, if men could. Yet he managed to live long enough to be killed in battle. Actually, though, he was killed by Achilles' spear and not by anyone's club. 
Rosalind also sneers at the Hero and Leander tale (see page I-466), saying of Leander: 


Ö he went but forth to wash him in the Hellespont,

and being taken with the cramp, was drowned;

and the foolish chroniclers of that age found it

was "Hero of Sestos."





óAct IV, scene i, lines 97-100 


Ö Caesar's thrasonical bragÖ






Now Orlando's older brother, Oliver, enters the picture again. Duke Frederick, suspecting that his daughter and her cousin had run off with Orlando, orders Oliver to find his brother on pain of his own death. 
In the forest, Oliver, sleeping, is threatened by a lioness. Orlando comes upon his brother and the beast and is tempted to leave Oliver to his fate. He cannot bring himself to do this, however, so he attacks the lioness and Oliver, awaking, witnesses the rescue. The older brother repents his earlier wickedness and is a changed character from this moment. 
He meets Celia and Ganymede and tells his story. He and Celia immediately fall in love. Rosalind/Ganymede later tells this to Orlando, saying: 


There was never anything so sudden

but the fight of two rams and Caesar's thrasonical brag

of "I came, saw, and overcame."





óAct V, scene ii, lines 29-31 


Caesar's deliberately brief report of his battle in Asia Minor in 47 B.C. (see page II-64) was intended to display a soldierly character, since military men were supposed to be men of action and not of words. There is nevertheless a certain affectation in the way in which Caesar sought the fewest syllables. 
Rosalind's characterization of it as a "thrasonical brag" makes use of too many syllables, on the other hand. "Thrasonical" means "bragging." The word comes from Thraso, a bragging soldier in The Eunuch, a play by the Roman dramatist Terence. That in turn comes from a Greek word meaning "overbold," which we may be sure Thraso pretended to be but was not. 


Hymen from heavenÖ




Now Rosalind begins to arrange everything. She makes Phebe promise to marry Silvius if it turns out she really cannot have "Ganymede." She then retires and returns in her natural woman's guise, led by none other than Hymen, the god of marriage (see page I-55), who says: 


Good Duke, receive thy daughter;

Hymen from heaven brought her,





óAct V, scene iv, lines 111-12 


The characters now pair off: Orlando with Rosalind, Oliver with Celia, Silvius with Phebe, and Touchstone with Audrey.
Only one thing is left to make everything right and that is supplied by the sudden appearance of Orlando's remaining brother, the one in the middle. He brings the news that Duke Frederick, leading a large army against Duke Senior, has met an old hermit and has been converted to the religious life. Duke Senior may thus consider himself restored to his title, and all ends happily. 








21. Twelfth Night, or, What You Will


Twelfth night is the twelfth day after Christmas-January 6. This is the traditional anniversary of the day on which the infant Jesus was viewed by the Magi and therefore the first manifestation of Jesus to the Gentiles. The day is also called Epiphany, from a Greek word meaning "manifestation." 
There is no biblical justification for this particular date or for any fixed number of days after the birth of Jesus for the appearance of the Magi. Nevertheless, it did afford the people in medieval times the chance of a twelve-day celebration following Christmas (hence the popular carol, "The Twelve Days of Christmas"). 
Twelfth Night was in some ways the climax of the festive period. In connection with this, a lawyers' guild seems to have commissioned Shakespeare in 1600 to write them an amusing play for Twelfth Night 1601. He did so and the play was called Twelfth Night after the occasion and not because of anything in the play itself. 
It was the third of Shakespeare's joyous comedies, all written at the turning of the century, and he apparently viewed them as trifles designed for amusement only. His titles show it: Much Ado About Nothing and As You Like It. Even this third play, usually called Twelfth Night, has a subtitle which perhaps more effectively describes Shakespeare's feeling- What You Will. 
This was the last warm comedy Shakespeare was to write for many years. The shadows closed in and for a decade he wrote somber tragedies and bitter non-tragedies (scarcely comedies). Why this should have been so, we can only speculate. One tempting thought is that it was the execution of Essex (see page I-120), which took place just after Twelfth Night was completed, that darkened the light for Shakespeare. 


Ö the food of love.. .




The setting of the play is Illyria. 
In actual geography, Illyria is the coastal district of what we now call Yugoslavia and makes up the eastern shores of the Adriatic Sea, just across from Italy. It never made up a prominent part of the civilized ancient world, though in the fourth century it contributed a series of great Roman emperors: Claudius II, Aurelian, Diocletian, and Constantine I. 
In the seventh century invading Slavs occupied Illyria and in the fourteenth century it fell into the grip of the Ottoman Turks. In Shakespeare's time what had once been Illyria and then became Serbia was still part of the Ottoman Empire. Parts of its coast, however, were controlled by Venice, and were Italian in culture. 
Still, we need not be overconcerned with actual geography. Shakespeare's Illyria, like his seacoast of Bohemia in The Winter's Tale and his Forest of Arden in As You Like It, really exists nowhere but in the play. 
It is the Duke of Illyria who speaks first. He is, apparently, lovesick, and says: 


// music be the food of love, play on,

Give me excess of it, that, surfeiting,

The appetite may sicken, and so die.





óAct I, scene i, lines 1-3 


The Duke's name is Orsino, which is derived from the Latin word for "bear" and is therefore most inappropriate for the overcultivated, over-refined Duke of this play. However, at the time the play was being written, Queen Elizabeth I of England was expecting an Italian visitor, Don Virginio Orsino, Duke of Bracciano (a town twenty miles northwest of Rome). Perhaps Shakespeare was offering the name as a delicate compliment to the Italian guest. 


Ö fell and cruel hounds




The Duke is apparently hopelessly in love with Olivia, a rich noblewoman of Illyria, and cannot be diverted from his sentimental melancholy. When it is suggested that he hunt the hart (that is, stag) he breaks into a self-pitying play upon the word, saying that when he saw Olivia: 


That instant was I turned into a hart,

And my desires, like fell and cruel hounds,

E'er since pursue me.





óAct I, scene i, lines 22-24 


This is a reference to the tale of Actaeon (see page I-406), who was turned into a stag by the angry Diana and was then killed by his own hounds.


Ö like Anon. ..




Meanwhile, on the Illyrian seacoast, Viola, a young lady, appears. With her are a ship's captain and his sailors. They have just survived a wreck in which the girl's twin brother has apparently been lost. 
Viola is heartsick over her brother's death, but the Captain says he saw her brother tie himself 


To a strong mast that lived upon the sea;

Where, like Arion on the dolphin's back,

I saw him hold acquaintance with the waves

So long as I could see.





óAct I, scene ii, lines 14-17 


Arion is a character out of Greek legend. He was a master musician at the court of Periander, tyrant of Corinth, about 600 b.c. He traveled to Sicily to compete in a musical contest, winning the prize and many rich gifts. 
On the ship back to Corinth, the sailors decided to kill Arion and appropriate those gifts. He asked permission only to play and sing one last time and, having done so, jumped into the sea and the ship sailed on. 
The music had, however, attracted a school of dolphins, and on the back of one of these, Arion was brought to Corinth faster than the ship could be rowed. At Corinth, Arion told his story and when the ship arrived, Periander had the sailors executed. 


Be you his eunuchÖ




Viola is heartened by the news, but there is still the problem of what she is to do next. As an unattended maiden, she would be in great danger, so once again Shakespeare uses the device of a girl dressed in a man's clothes. As a man, she decides to seek employment in Duke Orsino's service. The Captain approves and says: 


Be you his eunuch, and your mute I'll be;





óAct I, scene ii, line 62 


This is a stab at realism. A girl dressed in men's clothing would, in real life, give herself away with her hairless cheeks, her shrill voice, and her mincing ways. All these would fit a eunuch. 
Eunuchs were common in the East, and even in the West were valued in Italy for their high singing voices. The use of eunuchs in the papal choir was continued well into the nineteenth century. Nevertheless, Viola as a eunuch would not be fitted for the romantic role she is to have in the play, and the device of eunuch and mute is dropped at once and there is no mention of either at any later point in the play. 


Ö born under Taurus




The next scene is in the house of Olivia, the unresponsive object of Orsino's affection. 
In the house we meet Sir Toby Belch, Olivia's uncle, who sponges off her and off anyone else he can find. "Toby" is a diminutive of "Tobias" and "Belch" is descriptive of his tippling habits. With him is Maria, one of Olivia's women, and entering the scene almost immediately is Sir Andrew Aguecheek. (The name indicates his cheek has the habit of trembling, as though with ague or chills, but actually out of fear.) He is there because Sir Toby is encouraging him to court Olivia, meanwhile helping himself to the money the poor fellow has. 
Toby makes merciless fun of Sir Andrew, who never penetrates any mockery at his own expense. Thus, when Andrew boasts of his dancing ability, Toby encourages him to caper about, saying: 


What shall we do else?

Were we not born under Taurus?





óAct I, scene iii, lines 134-35 


This is a reference to the zodiac, so important to the pseudo science of astrology. There are twelve signs (constellations or star configurations) in the zodiac, which girdles the sky, and the sun spends one month in each of them. 
Apparently Sir Toby and Sir Andrew were both born in the month (April 20 to May 21) when the sun was in Taurus the Bull and were therefore born "under Taurus." Each sign is supposed to have a vast number of significances and is, as an example, supposed to govern a particular part of the body. When Andrew suggests that Taurus presides over sides and heart, Toby says: 


No, sir; it is legs and thighs.

Let me see thee caper.





óAct I, scene iii, lines 137-38 


Naturally, if Taurus presides over legs and thighs, those born under Taurus must be great dancers. 


Ö what says QuinapalusÖ




Also at Olivia's house is a Clown named Feste, which is very much like the Italian word for "holiday" and may be an oblique reference to the fact that the play was written to celebrate a holiday.
He has been absent without leave, and he is warned by Maria that he may be discharged. The Clown must therefore win over Olivia and he muses over methods for doing so, saying to himself: 


For what says Quinapalus?

"Better a witty fool than a foolish wit."





óAct I, scene v, lines 34-35 


It is useless to try to find Quinapalus in a reference book; the name is invented. The Clown apparently has had an education and it is his particular comic device to speak in pseudo-learned jargon. (This would appeal particularly to the lawyers who had commissioned the play.) 


Ö such a barren rascal




The Clown does indeed amuse Olivia and win her forgiveness, but one member of her staff remains untouched. He is Malvolio (his name means "ill will," the opposite of Benvolio, see page I-477, in Romeo and Juliet), who is Olivia's capable steward and hard-working business manager. 
Malvolio is humorless, austere, proud, and easily angered. The Clown's wit does not amuse him; it merely offends. He says: 


I marvel your ladyship

takes delight in such a barren rascal.





óAct I, scene v, lines 82-83 


Malvolio is Shakespeare's notion of a Puritan, and, indeed, he is referred to as one later in the play. 
The Protestant Reformation, which began to affect England in the reign of Henry VIII (see page II-783), settled down at last into a typical English compromise under Elizabeth I. There remained those men of Protestant persuasion, however, who were dissatisfied with the compromise and demanded that the English church be purified of those remnants of Catholicism which it possessed. 
These demanders of purification came to be called Puritans, and they grew more prominent throughout Elizabeth's reign, although she remained strong enough to refuse to give in to them even when they gained control of Parliament. 
The Puritans were self-consciously virtuous men who were equally conscious of the vices of those who disagreed with them. Stalwartly against serious forms of immorality, vice, and crime, Puritans tended to be just as stalwartly against trivial forms of these same things. By wasting their efforts on inconsequentials, they antagonized many who would have been willing to join the assault on important issues. Furthermore, then- pride in virtue was such that anyone was delighted when a Puritan was caught in sin, and it became easy to equate Puritanism with cant and hypocrisy. 
Indeed, Olivia's retort to Malvolio's complaint about the Clown is a reflection of the common attitude toward the Puritan. She says: 


O, you are sick of self-love, Malvolio,

and taste with a dis tempered appetite.





óAct I, scene v, lines 90-91 


Shakespeare, as a professional dramatist and actor, had a specific grudge against Puritans, since they denounced the theater as a haunt of sin and vice and an encouragement to idleness. It was their intention to close down the theaters if they could, and a professional dramatist and actor like Shakespeare could scarcely be expected to show Puritanism anything but hostility in consequence. 


Ö Sebastian of Messaline. ..




Meanwhile Viola has taken employment with Orsino under the name of Cesario and promptly falls in love with the Duke. As for Orsino, he takes a liking to the "young man" and uses him to carry a message to Olivia. 
Viola/Cesario carries the message to Olivia but in such a way as to make the Duke something less than impressive. Olivia is, however, favorably impressed with the "young man" and begins to show an affection which Viola/Cesario naturally finds horrifying. 
While that happens, Viola's twin brother, Sebastian, turns out to have survived the wreck after all. He has clung to the mast till picked up by another ship, whose captain, Antonio, takes a strong liking to the young man. Antonio's attitude is, in fact, even more marked than that of the other Antonio (in The Merchant of Venice) toward Bassanio, and is more clearly homosexual. 
Once both are on the Illyrian coast, Sebastian abandons a pseudonym he has been using (why, we are not told) and identifies himself, saying: 


You must know of me then, Antonio,

my name is Sebastian, which I called Roderigo.

My father was that Sebastian of Messaline

whom I know you have heard of.





óAct II, scene i, lines 16-19 


It is useless to search for Messaline. There is no such place. Either Shakespeare negligently made up a name or else, more likely, it is a printer's error that has been preserved ever since (because actually it makes no difference).
If it is a misprint there are two possibilities for what the place may have been. It may have been Messene, a Greek city in the southwestern Peloponnesus, about 360 miles southeast of the Illyrian coast; or Messina in Sicily, an almost equal distance southwest of it, and the scene of the action in Much Ado About Nothing (see page I-545). 
Sebastian takes his leave of Antonio, for he is bound for Orsino's court, where (unknown to him) his sister is. The court is dangerous for Antonio, who has gained the Duke's enmity, but his affection for Sebastian is so strong that he follows him anyway. 


Ö the four elements




The scene shifts to Olivia's house again, where late at night Sir Toby and his friends are having a rousing time. Sir Toby engages in mock-scholarly arguments with the foolish Sir Andrew, saying: 


Does not our lives

consist of the four elements?





óAct II, scene iii, lines 9-10 


The ancient Greek philosophers sought to find out the basic substance ("element") out of which the earth was constructed. Different philosophers had different candidates for the post, and Empedocles of Acragas finally suggested, about 450 B.C., that there was more than one. Four, altogether, were named: earth, water, air, and fire, and out of these all the earth was constructed. A century later Aristotle adopted this view and fixed it in human thought for two thousand years. 
The view did not begin to go out of fashion till half a century after Shakespeare's death, and we still today speak of the "raging of the elements" when we talk of wind and water being lashed to fury by a storm over the ocean. 
Malvolio comes in at length, to scold them for the noise they are making, and Sir Toby answers him with spirit, in the fashion that all fun-loving, but not really wicked, people might use to counter the self-righteous. He says to Malvolio: 


Dost thou think, because thou art virtuous,

there shall be no cakes and ale?





óAct II, scene iii, lines 114-15 


It is after he leaves that Maria says of him: 


Marry, sir, sometimes he is a kind of Puritan.





óAct II, scene iii, line 140 


Ö Penthesilea






Maria describes the most prominent component of Malvolio's character to be a monstrous self-pride and suggests that they work up a plan to take advantage of that. She will imitate Olivia's handwriting and drop notes in places where he can find them so that he will be misled into thinking Olivia is in love with him. He will then, Maria is sure, promptly make a most enormous ass of himself. 
Toby is absolutely delighted, and when she leaves, he calls after her: 


Good night, Penthesilea.





óAct II, scene iii, line 177 


Penthesilea in the Greek legends was an Amazon. According to some of the tales, she was the younger sister of Hippolyta, whom Theseus had married (see page I-18). It was Penthesilea who killed Hippolyta in the Amazonian war of revenge against Theseus, and afterward she joined the Trojans in their war against the Greeks and was killed in turn by Achilles. 
Clearly, an Amazon is bound to be a large and muscular woman, and Penthesilea particularly so, since she fought with credit against Achilles himself. But Maria, it is clear in several places in the play, is a particularly small girl, which gives Toby's remark its humor. 


Ö green and yellow melancholy




Duke Orsino, who intends to continue to use Viola/Cesario as his messenger to Olivia, talks of love to the "young man." Viola/Cesario sadly tells her love to Orsino, pretending it is her sister she is speaking of, and saying: 


She never told her love,

But let concealment, like a worm i'th'bud,

Feed on her damask cheek. She pined in thought,

And, with a green and yellow melancholy,

She sat like Patience on a monument,

Smiling at grief.





óAct II, scene iv, lines 111-16 


There is a glancing reference here to the doctrine of the four humors, first advanced by the school of Greek physicians who followed the famous Hippocrates of Cos (of the fifth century b.c.). 
They believed that there were four fluids, or "humors," in the body: phlegm, blood (sanguis in Latin), bile (chole in Greek), and black bile (melanchole in Greek). 
Bile is the secretion of the liver and there is only one variety, a greenish-yellow fluid. On standing, it grows much darker and becomes almost black; hence the distinction between bile and black bile. 
The Greek physicians elaborated the theory that the predominance of one fluid over the other resulted in a particular type of temperament or "humor" (see page II-424). There were people who were phlegmatic, sanguine, choleric, or melancholic. 
The expression "green and yellow melancholy" refers to the fact that bile was supposedly predominant in the melancholic, though Shakespeare is thinking of ordinary bile, rather than black bile. 


Ö a bearbaiting. ..




At Olivia's house, the plot to catch Malvolio progresses. A new character enters, Fabian. He is another of Olivia's servants and he too has a grudge against Malvolio. He says: 


You know he brought me out o'favor

with my lady about a bearbaiting here.





óAct II, scene v, lines 6-7 


In bearbaiting, a bear is tied to a stake, and sometimes muzzled. Dogs are then set on it and the "sport" consists in watching the maddened bear slowly tortured to death, usually killing a few dogs on the way. It was very popular in the time of Elizabeth I, and in 1575 thirteen bears were baited with the Queen an interested spectator. This "amusement" was not finally outlawed in England till 1835. 
Apparently Fabian had organized a bearbaiting, and Malvolio had complained of it to Olivia, whose soft heart had been touched and who had been angry with Fabian in consequence. 
This is a reflection of the fact that the Puritans, to their great credit, strove to have bearbaiting made illegal. (There were, however, not wanting those who said, cynically, that Puritans were against bearbaiting not because it gave pain to the bear but because it gave pleasure to the spectators.) 


Ö Jezebel




Malvolio now enters the trap. The letter has been planted in the garden, and the plotters hide in a tree watching Malvolio. The steward is so lost in self-conceit that he dreams of marriage with Olivia and begins to assume the airs of a great lord. Sir Toby is almost choked with indignation, and Sir Andrew, imitating Toby, cries out: 


Fie on him, Jezebel.




óAct II, scene v, line 41 


Jezebel was the idolatrous Queen of Israel, wife of wicked King Ahab. She is a byword for pride. When her son (the successor of Ahab) was killed by the revolutionary general Jehu, she met the murderer in her palace as a queen should. Though facing death, she dressed herself like a queen and taunted Jehu with a past revolution that had failed. Or, as the Bible puts it (2 Kings 9:30-31), "And when Jehu was come to Jezreel, Jezebel heard of it, and she painted her face, and tired her head, and looked out at a window. And as Jehu entered in at the gate, she said, Had Zimri peace, who slew his master?" 
Of course, Sir Andrew's use of the name is inappropriate from the standpoint of sex; for a man, however proud, can scarcely be a Jezebel; and his simplicity is designed to raise a laugh in the audience. 


Ö the impressure her Lucrece Ö




Malvolio eventually spies the letter, picks it up, and examines it. The handwriting on the outside seems Olivia's and the seal which closes the fold has Olivia's imprint. Malvolio describes it as: 


Ö the impressure her Lucrece,

with which she uses to seed.




óAct II, scene v, lines 94-95 


A person of quality would use a particular stamp (perhaps engraved on a ring) to impress the drop of wax sealing a letter, as further indication of ownership and guard against forgery. Olivia uses a representation of the Roman matron Lucretia, concerning whom (see page I-205) Shakespeare had written The Rape of Lucrece some six or seven years before. Of course, Maria had made use of her mistress' seal. 


Ö from the Sophy




Malvolio interprets the letter exactly as pleases his self-love. It advises him to do just the sort of thing Maria knows Olivia loathes. He is told to smile constantly, to be haughtier and surlier than ever, to talk politics, cultivate eccentricity, wear yellow stockings, and be cross-gartered. He swears to do it all, and when he leaves, Fabian, in the tree, half dead with suppressed laughter, says: 


I will not give my part of this sport

for a pension of thousands to be paid from the Sophy.




óAct II, scene v, lines 181-82 


The "Sophy" is the title given in England to the Persian Shah (see page I-521). In 1599, not long before Twelfth Night was written, Sir Anthony Shirley came back from Persia, laden with gifts from the Shah for his role in helping reorganize the Persian army. This remark of Fabian's, therefore, is a topical reference. 
As for Toby, he is so delighted with the working out of the plan that he offers to follow Maria 


To the gates of Tartar, thou

most excellent devil of wit.




óAct II, scene v, lines 207-8 


By Tartar is meant Tartarus, the level below Hades where evil souls were tortured for their sins (see page I-13). 


Cressida was a beggar




Viola/Cesario has come to Olivia's for another interview on behalf of the Duke. She exchanges wit with the Clown and then gives him a coin. The Clown promptly asks, in literary style, for another: 


/ would play Lord Pandarus of Phrygia, sir,

to bring a Cres sida to this Troilus.




óAct III, scene i, lines 52-53 


This refers to the famous tale Shakespeare was soon to put to use in his own Troilus and Cressida. Viola/Cesario gets the allusion and commends the begging, whereupon the Clown instantly points out that: 


Cressida was a beggar.




óAct III, scene i, line 56 


A late sequel to the medieval tale explained how Cressida was punished for betraying Troilus. She was stricken with leprosy and became a diseased beggar. Shakespeare did not use this part of the tale in his own treatment (see page I-124), but this line is evidence enough that he knew of it.


Ö music from the spheres




In the second interview, Olivia is bolder than in the first. She says, when Viola/Cesario speaks of the Duke: 


I bade you never speak again of him;

But, would you undertake another suit,

I had rather hear you to solicit that

Than music from the spheres.




óAct III, scene i, lines 109-12 


This is another Shakespearean reference to the Pythagorean doctrine of the music of the spheres (see page I-199). Despite Olivia's invitation to speak for himself, Viola/Cesario has no option but to flee. 


Ö a Dutchman's beardÖ




Olivia's love for Viola/Cesario does not go unnoticed, however. The foolish Sir Andrew is not so foolish as to fail to see it, and, petulantly, he decides his own suit is useless and prepares to leave. 
Toby and Fabian, unwilling to let go their profitable gull, try to argue him out of this first sensible decision he has made. They assure him that Olivia is only trying to make him jealous and that Sir Andrew is losing out only because he isn't a daring enough lover. Sir Toby says: 


Ö you are now sailed into the North

of my lady's opinion, where you will hang

like an icicle on a Dutchman's beard

unlessyou do redeem it by some

laudable attempt either of valor or policy.





óAct III, scene ii, lines 26-30 


To sail into the north of a lady's opinion is a clear metaphor representing her growing coldness. It is also a topical reference. Between 1594 and 1597 there was the most spectacular attempt man had yet seen to explore the Arctic regions. The Dutch explorer Willem Barents had sailed northeastward, discovering Spitsbergen in 1596 and exploring the coasts of the large Siberian islands of Novaya Zemlya. He spent the whiter of 1596-97 in the Arctic, the first non-Eskimo to do so. He died in 1597 on his return voyage and in his honor that stretch of water lying between Spitsbergen and Novaya Zemlya is known as the Barents Sea. There is no doubt but that the "Dutchman" in Sir Toby's speech is a reference to Barents.


.. .be a Brownist. ..




Given the choice between valor and policy, Sir Andrew (equally pathetic in both) chooses valor as the manlier. He says: 


/ had as lief be a Brownist

as a politician.





óAct III, scene ii, lines 32-33 


This is another sneer at Puritanism. The Brownists were followers of Robert Browne, who was such an extreme Puritan he felt he had to leave the Church of England altogether. He founded an independent church hi 1580 and in 1582 went off into exile to the Netherlands. 
The Brownists were to form an interesting part of American history. Some of them, who had made a new home for themselves in Dutch exile, felt they could not maintain their English identity there and determined to establish a colony in the New World. In 1620, four years after Shakespeare's death, they sailed westward and landed in Plymouth, becoming America's revered Pilgrim Fathers. 


Ö the bed of Ware.. .




Pleased with Sir Andrew's decision to be valiant, Sir Toby mischievously urges him on to write a challenge to Viola/Cesario. He tells him to write 


Ö as many lies as will lie in thy sheet of paper,

although the sheet were big enough for the bed

of Ware in EnglandÖ





óAct III, scene ii, lines 47-49 


Ware was a market town about twenty miles north of London which in Shakespeare's time was famous for a huge bed, eleven feet square, reportedly capable of allowing twelve people to sleep on it at once. It was in several different inns in the vicinity at one time or another and in 1931 finally came into the possession of the Victoria and Albert Museum in London. 


Ö the augmentation of the Indies




This new practical joke has scarcely been placed under way when the old one regarding Malvolio reaches a climax. Maria comes in to say that Malvolio has fulfilled all the requests of the letter; yellow stockings, cross-garterings, and all, down to the perpetual smiling: 
588 ITALIAN 


He does smile his face

into more lines than is in the new map

with the augmentation of the Indies.





óAct III, scene ii, lines 78-80 


Mariners were particularly interested in marking a rhumb line on a map that would indicate the shortest distance from one point to another. On the globe, such a line would be a curve spiraling northward or southward. 
In 1568 the Flemish geographer Gerhard Kremer (better known by the Latinized version of his last name, Mercator) put out a map of the world plotted in such a way that the rhumb lines were straight. Maps for navigation based on Mercator's scheme could be easily marked with rhumb lines, and many of them were therefore put in, crossing and crisscrossing. 
What's more, the sixteenth-century explorations had led to an increasingly detailed knowledge of the Americas ("The Indies"), and about the time that Twelfth Night was being written, a new map, with numerous rhumb lines, was published, showing the New World in far greater and more accurate detail than had ever been shown before. This added detail was the "augmentation of the Indies." 


Ö Jove, not I Ö




Maria tells Olivia that Malvolio seems to be raving, and when he appears on the scene, grotesquely clothed and quoting meaningfully from the letter, Olivia, flabbergasted, can only think he really is mad. 
Malvolio is so far gone in self-delusion, however, that he interprets everything in the light of Olivia's supposed love for him, and in the midst of his triumphing, he remembers to be pious, saying: 


Well, Jove, not I, is the doer of this,

and he is to be thanked.





óAct III, scene iv, lines 87-88 


This is undoubtedly intended to mock Puritan sanctimoniousness, and, just as undoubtedly, the real Malvolio would have said "God" or "the Lord" or "the Almighty." Growing Puritan strength, however, in later years clamped down on references to God on the stage, and this form of ridiculous censorship led to the foolish substitution of "Jove." 


Ö Legion himself Ö




Sir Toby conies fussing in, full of mock concern over Malvolio's madness, and saying:


If all the devils of hell be drawn in little,

and Legion himself possessed him,

yet I'll speak to him.





óAct III, scene iv, lines 89-92 


This is a reference to one of the examples of demonic possession in the New Testament. When Jesus asks the name of the "unclean spirit" possessing a man, that spirit answers "My name is Legion: for we are many" (Mark 5:9). 


Ö like cockatrices




Toby baits Malvolio with his supposed madness and when the latter rushes off in a fury, Toby arranges to have him placed in a dark room because of his supposed madness, so that the practical joke may continue. 
Meanwhile the affair of Sir Andrew and Viola/Cesario is developing further. Sir Andrew has written a cautiously phrased and clearly cowardly letter. Sir Toby accepts it gravely, but does not deliver it. He intends to deliver a challenge verbally, enormously exaggerating Sir Andrew's fire-eating propensities. He will then report with equal exaggeration to Sir Andrew, concerning what a raging fury Viola/Cesario is in. He says: 


This will so fright them both that they

will kill one another by the look, like cockatrices.





óAct III, scene iv, lines 203-4 


The cockatrice is the fabulous serpent which can kill by his mere glance (see page I-150). 


Ö in Lethe steep




There now begins a series of mistakings very like those in The Comedy of Errors, complicated by difference in sex. 
Antonio, the captain who has befriended Sebastian, has given him a purse of money to use, then follows him to keep an eye on him and guard himÖ 
Meanwhile, Viola/Cesario, coming for another interview with Olivia, is waylaid by Sir Toby, who delivers Sir Andrew's challenge. The frightened Viola/Cesario finds he must fight the frightened Sir Andrew, but before anything can happen, Antonio comes charging in. 
Assuming that Viola/Cesario is Sebastian, he is about to begin a fight in good earnest, when the Duke's officers come in to arrest him on the old charge of piracy. Antonio must ask Viola/Cesario to return his bag of money, for a fine may save his life. Naturally, Viola/Cesario knows nothing about the money, and Antonio is greatly upset over this seeming perfidy as he is dragged away. 
And Sebastian too has his share of the confusion. Olivia encounters him, thinks he is Viola/Cesario, and begins to speak of love. Sebastian finds this entirely to his liking and says: 


Ö I am mad, or else this is a dream.

Let fancy still [always] my sense in Lethe steep;

If it be thus to dream, still [always] let me sleep! 




óAct IV, scene i, lines 61-63 


Lethe was the name of one of the rivers of Hades, according to Greek mythology. All spirits were forced to drink of it, for it had the property of inducing forgetfulness so that past life on earth vanished from memory and only the spirit world remained. Sebastian is wishing, then, to forget his past existence and to live only in the present one, in which beautiful loving women appear from nowhere. 


Ö King GorboducÖ




But the Malvolio affair is not yet done. Malvolio is now locked in a dark room and Sir Toby plans a further torment. He will have the Clown personify a curate, "Sir Topas," who will pretend to examine Malvolio. 
The Clown demonstrates his skill at the part by talking a little learned-sounding gibberish. He says: 


Ö as the old hermit of Prague,

that never saw pen and ink,

very wittily said to a niece

of King Gorboduc, "That that is is."





óAct IV, scene ii, lines 13-16 


Gorboduc was a legendary king of early Britain, and in 1562 he was the subject of a play written by Thomas Norton and Thomas Sackville. In this play, Gorboduc divided his kingdom between two sons, Ferrex and Por-rex, and civil war followed. It was the first blank-verse tragedy published in England and began the cycle of drama that culminated so rapidly in the Shakespearean climax. 


Ö the Egyptians in their fog




The Clown now begins the discussion with Malvolio through the closed door and is merciless. He insists the room in which Malvolio has been locked is not dark and that it is only the latter's mad imagination that makes it seem dark. The Clown says: 


Ö there is no darkness

but ignorance, in which thou art more puzzled

than the Egyptians in their fog.





óAct IV, scene ii, lines 43-45 


The "fog" spoken of here is the ninth plague brought down on Egypt by Moses prior to the Exodus. It is mentioned in Exodus 1:22-23: "And Moses stretched forth his hand toward heaven; and there was a thick darkness in all the land of Egypt three days: They saw not one another, neither rose any from his place for three days." 


Ö the opinion of Pythagoras.. .




Malvolio, maintaining his sanity firmly, offers to answer any questions. The Clown asks: 


What is the opinion of Pythagoras

concerning wild fowl?





óAct IV, scene ii, lines 51-52 


Malvolio answers: 


That the soul of our grandam

might happily inhabit a bird.





óAct IV, scene ii, lines 53-54 


This is another Shakespearean reference to the Pythagorean theory of transmigration of souls (see page I-535), and is a perfectly correct answer. 


Ö from Candy




By now Duke Orsino has grown tired of sending to Olivia fruitlessly and decides to go himself. When he reaches Olivia's house, he is met by his officers, who bring the sea captain Antonio to judgment. 
The first officer says: 


Orsino, this is that Antonio

That took the Phoenix and her fraught [cargo] from Candy;

And this is he that did the Tiger board

When your young nephew Titus lost his leg.





óAct V, scene i, lines 60-63 


There is an unobvious reference here to the island of Crete. Crete has been a Greek-speaking island throughout history and in the early Middle Ages the largest city upon it was named Herakleon. In 826 Crete was captured by Moslems, who built a fortress on the site of the city and called it Khandax. 
In 1204 the Venetians took the island and to them Khandax became Candia (and to the English, Candy). Since Candia was the largest city in Crete, it gave the name to the entire island. (Within the last century the island has become Greek again, taken back its own name, and its largest city is back almost to what it was-Iraklion). 
In Shakespeare's time Venice and the Ottoman Turks were in a state of chronic warfare over the eastern islands, including Crete, and so there is this vague reference to some sort of battle in which Crete is named. 


Ö th'Egyptian thief.. .




Mix-ups continue. Antonio denies he was a pirate but claims his deeds to have been lawful acts of war. However, he accuses Viola/Cesario of ingratitude and the latter desperately denies knowledge of what the captain is talking about. 
To make matters worse, Olivia enters. She has married the delighted Sebastian and now thinks Viola/Cesario is he and claims her lovingly. Orsino, seeing that his servant has won the heart he himself could not, is furious and is almost moved to murder. He says: 


Why should I not, had I the heart to do it,

Like to th'Egyptian thief at point of death,

Kill what I love?





óAct V, scene i, lines 117-19 


"Th'Egyptian thief" is a character in a romance, Ethiopica, by Helio-dorus, a Greek author of the third century b.c. It is the earliest Greek romance that has survived and follows a pair of lovers, Theagenes and Charicleia, through innumerable adventures. At one point an Egyptian bandit, Thyamis, kidnaps Charicleia, whom he hopelessly loves, and when he is besieged, he tries to kill her in the darkness so that if he cannot have her, no one else can. He misses his mark, Charicleia survives, and the story reaches a happy ending. 
It was translated into English in 1569 and was popular enough to ensure that Shakespeare's audience would get the allusion without trouble.


Ö a bloody coxcomb Ö




Olivia claims Viola/Cesario as her husband and the mix-up is growing dangerous for the latter, when in comes a bleeding Sir Andrew. He and Sir Toby have mistaken Sebastian for Viola/Cesario and attacked him. They were well banged as a result. As the sniveling Sir Andrew says: 


H'as broke my head across, and has given

Sir Toby a bloody coxcomb too.





óAct V, scene i, lines 175-76 


The coxcomb, from the object worn on a fool's head (see page II-17), gradually came to be a familiar appellation for the head. 
Toby comes on the scene too, bleeding and deeply humiliated. Then comes Sebastian, and his appearance solves the entire mix-up at once. Even Antonio understands, and we can be sure he will not be seriously punished. 


I'll be revenged. ..




The Duke now discovers that Viola/Cesario is a girl and that she loves him. He asks to see her in her woman's clothing and she replies that that clothing is with the Captain who brought her on shore and he is in prison through the action of Malvolio. (This is the first mention of any such thing. The reason for Malvolio's action is not explained, nor for Viola's failure to do anything about it. It is clearly an afterthought.) 
Nevertheless, it gives an excuse to bring in Malvolio. The joke at his expense is explained and all agree he has been ill used. He is not mollified, however, but instead goes snarling off, his last words being: 


I'll be revenged on the whole pack of you!





óAct V, scene i, line 380 


To be sure, Olivia expresses her sympathy again after he leaves and the Duke sends after to have him pacified and brought back, but that last line stands. 
If Malvolio represents Puritanism, Shakespeare's insight was not wrong. Puritans were revenged on the theater. They continued to grow stronger until, under their leadership, Parliament rose in revolt against King Charles I in 1642. After years of fighting, the Puritans and their allies won a final victory in 1648 and the King was executed in 1649. Malvolio, in the person of Oliver Cromwell, controlled England and the theaters were closed down.
In 1660, to be sure, with Cromwell dead, the son of Charles I was brought back from exile and was made King Charles II. There followed a time of gaiety and frivolity and the stage was given over to "Restoration comedy"-mere froth and not even an echo of Shakespeare. 








22. All's Well That Ends Well


All's well that ends well was written about 1602. Though it ends happily and is therefore technically a comedy, it lacks a carefree fun and happiness of the previous comedies. It is, indeed, rather an unpleasant play, like Troilus and Cressida (see page I-71), which was written shortly before. 


Ö my son.. .




The play opens with a group of people dressed in mourning onstage. The first to speak is the Countess of Rousillon, who has recently lost her husband (hence the mourning). She has fresh cause for sorrow, too, and says: 


In delivering my son from me

I bury a second husband.





óAct I, scene i, lines 1-2 


What's happening is that her son, Bertram, the young Count of Rousillon, is going to Paris to be brought up at the court of the King of France and his mother hates to part with him. 
Rousillon is treated in this play as part of France, and indeed (as Rous-sillon-the French use two s's), so it is-today. It is located just north of the Pyrenees at their eastern edge adjacent to the Mediterranean Sea. Its chief city is Perpignan. 
Through much of its history, however, it was not part of France. While the Pyrenees are the general boundary between France and Spain, Rousillon was, from 1172 on, part of the kingdom of Aragon (see page I-526), located just south of the mountains. 
It was not till 1450 that France was sufficiently united and sufficiently free of the English menace (see page II-562) to turn its attention to the spread of Spanish power across the mountain range. King Louis XI of France (see page II-651) sent expeditions southward and Rousillon became French in 1465. In 1493, however, Louis' son, Charles VIII, more interested in invading Italy, handed Rousillon back to Aragon to win Aragonese good will for his venture.
By that time Aragon had formed a union with Castile, and modern Spain had taken shape. Spain was at the height of its power then and held on to Rousillon till 1659, at which time it became permanently French. 
Thus, when All's Well That Ends Well was written, Rousillon was Spanish, not French. Shakespeare obtained his plot from one of the tales in the Decameron by Boccaccio, which dealt with Beltram of Rossiglione. But the Decameron was published in 1353 and at that time Rossiglione (which, presumably, is Rousillon) was Aragonese, not French, and yet Boccaccio portrayed Beltram as a Frenchman. 
Not that it's important, of course, for as far as the play is concerned, Rousillon might have been any other name-an imaginary one, for that matter. 


Ö the King Ö




An elderly lord, Lafew, reassures the Countess, saying: 


You shall find of the

King a husband, madam; you, sir, a father,





óAct I, scene i, lines 7-8 


It is useless to try to find out who the King of France is. No actual King of France unmistakably fits the events in the play, and he is not named either in this play or in the Decameron source. 
It turns out that the King is suffering from a lingering, chronic disease and that cure is despaired of. One medieval French king who did suffer from a lingering, chronic disease was Charles VI (see page II-464), who reigned from 1380 to 1422 and was mentally ill most of the time. There is no other comparison, however, and we might as well accept the fact that the King, as well as everything else in the play, is fictional. 


Ö Gerard de Narbon




The Countess regrets the death of a physician so skilled that he might surely have cured the King. She tells Lafew: 


He was famous sir, in his profession,

and it was his great right to be so: Gerard de Narbon.





óAct I, scene i, lines 28-29 


He was, in other words, of the city of Narbonne, and this, at least, fits well geographically. Narbonne is located some thirty miles north of Per-pignan.


Ö but Bertram's




Gerard de Narbon has left behind a beautiful and virtuous daughter, who is in the Countess' care. When all leave the stage, she remains and says: 


Ö my imagination Carries no favor in't

but Bertram's. I am undone; there is

no living, none, If Bertram be awayÖ





óAct I, scene i, lines 88-91 


This is the major complication of the play. Helena, the doctor's daughter, loves Bertram, the young Count of Rousillon, and therefore loves "above her station." The doctor, however skilled, is of menial position, while Bertram is, of course, a nobleman. 


Ö a notorious liar




Helena's soliloquy is interrupted by the entrance of Parolles, Bertram's favorite companion. Parolles professes to be a fierce warrior, dresses and talks the part, but does not fool Helena. She says, aside: 


I love him [Parolles] for his [Bertram's] sake,

And yet I know him a notorious liar,

Think him a great way fool, solely a coward;





óAct I, scene i, lines 105-7 


As a matter of fact, everyone who meets Parolles sees through him at once and knows him to be all talk (his very name is related to the French word for "words"). Only Bertram is deceived and takes him for genuine, which seems to be clear evidence that Bertram is rather a fool. 


Under Mars Ö




Helena and Parolles engage in conversation and when Helena refers to the star under which he was born, he replies, swaggeringly: 


Under Mars, ay.




óAct I, scene i, line 199 


He claims in this way to have an inborn martial personality (see page I-404). Helena says, dryly, however:


When he [Mars] wax retrogradeÖ




óAct I, scene i, line 203 


Mars' path across the sky is generally from west to east against the background of the stars. Periodically, however, it changes direction and moves from east to west. It is then moving backward or "retrograde." The ancient Greeks labored to account for such retrograde motion but it wasn't till Copernicus elaborated the heliocentric view with the sun at the center of the solar system that the situation was made clear. Periodically, the earth in its orbit overtakes Mars and it is then that the planet seems to move backward. 
Helena, by use of the term, indicates that if Parolles is born under Mars, he nevertheless moves backward and retreats hastily in battle. 


The Florentines and Senoys. ..




The second scene opens in the King's palace in Paris. The King is involved in statecraft, saying: 


The Florentines and Senoys are by th'ears,

Have fought with equal fortune, and continue

A braving war.





óAct I, scene ii, lines 1-3 


Florence was the great city of the Italian Renaissance (see page I-448) and the "Senoys" are natives of Siena, a city about thirty miles south of Florence. For centuries Siena and Florence were rivals, and down nearly to Boccaccio's time, the fight remained fairly equal. 
Siena, however, was already declining when the Decameron was written and it came more and more under the Florentine shadow. In 1557 Florence finally gained political control of Siena and the latter's history as an independent city-state came to an end. 


Ö our cousin Austria




The King goes on to say: 


We here receive it

A certainty, vouched from our cousin Austria,

With caution, that the Florentine will move us

For speedy aid; wherein our dearest friend

Prejudicates the business, and would seem

To have us make denial.





óAct II, scene i, lines 4-9 


Again there is no use in searching history for any specific event that would mirror this. 
In the sixteenth century there was a great rivalry between Francis I of France and the Emperor Charles V (see page II-747), the core of whose dominions within the Empire was Austria. Francis and Charles fought over Italy all through their reigns, with Charles having the better of it most of the time. 
With this in mind, we can perhaps interpret the King's speech in terms of practical politics as follows. Austria has warned France that if she interferes in Italy and supports Florence, Austria will come to the aid of Siena in order to preserve the balance of power. France then adopts the prudent path of neutrality. 


The Tuscan service. ..




Yet if France cannot openly intervene, there is another method open to her. She can send "volunteers" (a device known to and used by nations in our own times). The King says: 


Yet, for our gentlemen that mean to see

The Tuscan service, freely have they leave

To stand on either part.





óAct II, scene i, lines 12-14


The region in which Florence and Siena are located was known as Etruria in ancient tunes, and was inhabited by the Etruscans. The regional name was distorted to Tuscany (Toscana in Italian) in the Middle Ages. 
Through the Middle Ages Tuscany did not form a separate and united political entity but was broken up among several city-states, of which Florence, Pisa, and Siena were the most important. In 1557, however, with the absorption of Siena, Florence came to be in control of the entire region. Cosimo I, Duke of Florence, was awarded the higher title of Grand Duke of Tuscany in 1569 by Pope Pius V. In Shakespeare's time, then, Tuscany was on the map. 


Ö King PippenÖ




And while the court is involved with the Tuscan wars, Helena arrives.
She hopes to cure the King with some of her dead father's remedies and she also hopes to see Bertram. She carries with her the best wishes of the old Countess, who loves the girl and doesn't seem to be disturbed by the thought of a mesalliance. 
Lafew is at court to introduce Helena. He asks the King if he wants to be cured, but the King has so often been disappointed that he has given up and answers, crossly, in the negative. Lafew says: 


O, will you eat No grapes, my royal fox?





óAct II, scene i, lines 71-72 


The reference is, of course, to Aesop's famous fable of the fox who could not reach the grapes and who consoled himself with the thought that he did not want them anyway, since they were probably sour. 
Lafew assures the King that he can indeed get the grapes and that there is indeed a cure. He describes the cure as something 


Ö whose simple touch

Is powerful to araise King Pippen, nay,

To give great Charlemain a pen in's hand,

And write to her a love-line.





óAct II, scene i, lines 77-80 


It can raise, in Lafew's hyperbole, the long dead Charlemagne, and his father Pepin (Pippen) the Short (see page II-455). 
Lafew then brings in Helena and leaves her with the King, saying as he himself departs: 


1 am Cressid's uncle,

That dare leave two together.





óAct II, scene i, lines 99-100 


Cressid's uncle was Pandarus, who served as go-between for her and Troilus (see page I-79) and was thus the original pander. Lafew's "pandering" is, of course, of quite another kind. 


Moist HesperusÖ




Helena promises the King a quick recovery. In fact, he will be well 


Ere twice in murk and occidental damp

Moist Hesperus hath quenched her sleepy lamp,





óAct II, scene i, lines 165-66


Hesperus (see page I-187) is the evening star. It sets in the western ocean (hence "occidental damp" and "moist") and it sets up to three hours after the sun, so that her light is a "sleepy lamp." 


Ö Galen and Paracelsus




The medicine works precisely as Helena had promised and the King is quickly made well. All, even Lafew, are astonished, since all the other physicians had been utterly helpless. Even the worthless Parolles agrees, saying: 


So 1 say-both of Galen and Paracelsus.




óAct II, scene iii, line 11 


Galen was a Greek physician who settled in Rome in 164. He wrote many books on medicine, which were excellent for their time. They survived the fall of ancient civilization and were considered the last word on the subject throughout the Middle Ages. 
The first physician to argue strenuously against blind acceptance of Galen and in favor of a new regime of mineral medicines as opposed to the old use of herbs was Theophrastus von Hohenheim, better known by his self-adopted nickname of Paracelsus. He lived from 1493 to 1541 and from Shakespeare's point of view would have been a "modern" physician. 
What Parolles is saying, then, is that the King had been given up by all physicians of both the old school and the new. 


Ö Saint Jaques' pilgrim Ö




The King is naturally grateful to Helena and offers her, as a reward, marriage with any of the noblemen at court. She chooses Bertram, who starts back in revulsion and horror at the thought of marrying a lowborn girl. 
The King insists, however, and Bertram is forced into marriage. As soon as that is done, however, the young man determines to make it a dead letter. He orders Helena back to Rousillon without taking her to bed or even kissing her. 
She goes submissively, and when she arrives, she has only a letter to show Bertram's mother, the Countess. He says he is off to the Tuscan wars and will never return as long as he is burdened with a wife he cannot accept. Nor will he ever accept her until she can produce his ring, which he will not give her, and show him a child begotten by him, for which he will give her no opportunity.
The old Countess is horrified. She is all on Helena's side, as is everyone else in the play (and in the audience) except for Parolles and, of course, Bertram himself. 
But Helena begins to put into action a plan of her own. She departs from Rousillon in secret, leaving behind a letter that starts: 


I am Saint Jaques' pilgrim, thither gone.





óAct III, scene iv, line 4 


St. Jaques is James the Apostle, the son of Zebedee. According to a tradition which has no biblical backing whatever, he visited Spain and preached the gospel there. As a result, he is accepted now as the patron saint of Spain. He must, however, have returned to Judea, for the Bible records his death there at the order of Herod Agrippa I (Acts 12:1-2). 
Tradition then takes over again and has his dead body miraculously whisked to Spain, where it finally came to rest in a shrine at Compostela, a city in the northwestern corner of Spain, about six hundred miles west of Perpignan. If Helena goes there she is traveling in the direction opposite to that Bertram has taken. She is going west into farthest Spain, he east to Tuscany. 
"James" is the English version of a Hebrew name of which "Jacob" is the Old Testament version. In Spanish it is Iago, and St. James is Santiago. The city in which the bones were thought to rest is Santiago de Compostela. 


Ö his despiteful Juno Ö




Helena asks the Countess to write and tell Bertram she is gone so that he can come safely home from the wars. She scolds herself, saying: 


His taken [undertaken] labors bid him [Bertram] me forgive;

I, his despiteful Juno, sent him forth

From courtly friends with camping foes to live,





óAct III, scene iv, lines 12-14 


Hercules, who was Jupiter's son by a mortal woman, naturally incurred the wrath of Juno (Hera), who was Jupiter's lawful wife. It was her enmity that visited him with periodic bouts of madness and condemned him to perform twelve labors for an unworthy cousin. Analogously, Helena considers the mere fact of her own existence to be condemning Bertram to warlike labors.


Ö the palmers Ö




As a matter of fact, though, Helena is not quite as unselfish as she is presenting herself to be. She does not go to the shrine at all but sneaks off to Florence in disguise as a pilgrim, hoping that she may yet win her reluctant husband. There she stops to ask: 


Where do the palmers lodge, I do beseech you?





óAct III, scene v, line 35 


A pilgrim who had visited the Holy Land was privileged to wear palm leaves as a token he had done so (it is a plant native to Palestine) and was therefore called a "palmer." 
Helena asks the question of an old Widow, who offers her lodgings. The Widow has a beautiful and virtuous daughter, Diana, and it quickly turns out that Bertram (who is doing very well in Florence and is now a cavalry officer) is busily engaged in trying to seduce the girl. 
Helena reveals her identity and persuades the two women to let her take Diana's place so that Bertram will sleep with her unknowingly, thinking she is Diana. 
Diana agrees and cajoles Bertram into giving her his ring (the one he wrote in his letter that Helena would have to display before he would accept her as wife) and offers him an assignation provided he promises to stay only an hour and to refrain from speaking to her during that time. She promises to give him another ring in exchange for his after he has slept with her. So eager is he to win her that he agrees. 
Helena then arranges to have herself reported as having reached Santiago de Compostela and to have died there. 


Ö he parallels Nessus




Parolles, meanwhile, has won the contempt of all the officers, and they scheme to maneuver him into betraying his real character. Parolles has been sent out on a dangerous mission for which, out of sheer stupid braggadocio, he has volunteered. He is captured by his own colleagues and is blindfolded. 
Pretending to be foreigners of strange speech, they question him through a mock interpreter. At the merest hint of torture, he tells everything he knows and reviles the very men who (unknown to him) are holding him prisoner. He even defames Bertram. 
Thus, of one officer, he says: 


Ö for rapes and ravishments he parallels Nessus.





óAct IV, scene iii, line 264 


Nessus was the centaur who tried to rape Hercules' wife, Deianeira (see page I-380). 
When he has completely unmasked himself for the coward he is, his blindfold is removed and he realizes that he is ruined. He decides to make the best of it, however, and later, in fact, he enters the service of the kindly Lafew and does well enough. 


Ö at Marseilles. ..




With Helena's reported death, Bertram can return to Rousillon, but first he wants to go through with the seduction of Diana. This takes place offstage, but we gather that Helena has safely substituted herself. Bertram has kept the bargain, stayed an hour, refrained from speaking, and accepted the ring (Helena's ring, which she, in turn, had received from the King of France). And Helena has the ring Bertram gave Diana. 
Helena is therefore also ready to return, taking the Widow and Diana with her. She intends to see the King and says to her companions: 


/ duly am informed

His Grace is at Marseilles, to which place

We have convenient convoy.




óAct IV, scene iv, lines 8-10 


Marseilles is the great French port on the Mediterranean, about 280 miles west of Florence and 140 miles northeast of Roussillon. If Helena goes to Marseilles, she is two thirds of the way home. 
She is counting on the King's continuing gratitude, for she says her services were such that 


Ö gratitude

Through flinty Tartar's bosom would peep forth,

And answer thanks




óAct IV, scene iv, lines 6-8 


In the thirteenth century Mongol tribes from central Asia swept westward and penetrated deep into Europe, reaching almost to the Adriatic in 1240. This gave Europe a scare from which it didn't recover for a long time. 
The Mongols called themselves Tatars, but to the Europeans this became Tartars (from Tartarus, see page I-40). The Tatars, considered as creatures from hell, were naturally considered the epitome of heartlessness, and Helena felt that even they would feel gratitude for services such as hers.


All's well that ends well. ..




Helena has gone through a great deal and there is more yet to go through, but she keeps up her spirits with a stouthearted: 


All's well that ends well; still the fine's the crown.





óAct IV, scene iv, line 35 


The word "fine," from the French fin, means "end" here. Helena is saying that the nature of the end crowns the work, making it success or failure. This so summarizes the play-which, from Helena's point of view, is nothing but misery all the way to very nearly the end-that it has become the title of the play. 
Yet is it possible the play once had a different title? 
An English clergyman, Francis Meres, wrote a book in 1598 in which he compared contemporary English authors with classical and Italian ones, and, in the process, he listed Shakespeare's plays. He included one named Love's Labor's Won. This is the only play ever attributed to Shakespeare that we have no record of under the title mentioned. Either it's a lost play or we have it under a different title. 
If the latter, it must be one that isn't mentioned by Meres under its own title and one that had already been written by 1598. One possibility is The Taming of the Shrew, in which Petruchio must labor hard indeed to establish love between himself and Katherina (see page I-462). There is, however, a reference in a 1603 account book to both The Taming of the Shrew and Love's Labor's Won. 
The most popular theory, therefore, is that it refers to All's Well That Ends Well and to Helena's hard labor to win Bertram. But, alas, that means that the play would have had to be written several years before it was. 
It's a problem that may never be solved completely, but I would like to suggest a possibility I have not seen advanced. Shakespeare may perhaps have written Love's Labor's Won in, say, 1597, and because it was a failure, rewrote it extensively and produced it as All's Well That Ends Well, with no record of the earlier version except for the casual mention of Meres, writing between the two. 


Ö no great Nebuchadnezzar Ö




There is an interval before the resolution in the last act in which the Countess has the last of several confrontations with a Clown. None of these serves to advance the plot, but each is intended as comic relief. In this last, the Clown mentions "grace" and promptly expands it into wordplay by saying to Lafew:


/ am no great Nebuchadnezzar, sir;

1 have not much skill in grace.





óAct IV, scene v, lines 21-22 


This equates "grace" and "grass," and Nebuchadnezzar is brought in because according to the biblical account (Daniel 4:28-37) he was punished for his arrogance by being stricken with a madness that drove him out into the fields and caused him to eat grass for seven years. 


The Black PrinceÖ




The Clown also refers to the devil as having an English name, for he is 


The Black Prince, sir,

alias the prince of darkness, alias the devil.





óAct IV, scene v, lines 43-44 


It is quite appropriate to speak of the devil as the "prince of darkness," for our modern conception of the devil comes, in part, from the Persian notion of a dualistic cosmic order in which the forces of light and good under Ahura Mazda fight a continuing giant battle against the forces of darkness and evil under Ahriman. 
And a prince of darkness would naturally be a Black Prince like the famous eldest son of Edward III (see page II-260). 


Plutus himself Ö




Bertram has now come back to Rousillon. When Helena reaches Marseilles, she finds that the King has gone to Rousillon and she follows. All are now converging on Rousillon for the climax. 
Bertram is generally blamed by all for his treatment of Helena, but since Helena is dead, the slate is washed clean and preparations are made for a second marriage, to none other than Lafew's daughter. 
A token must be given to the new bride and Bertram hands over the ring which he had (as he thought) obtained from Diana. It is really Helena's ring, however, which she obtained from the King; and the King recognizes it. Despite Bertram's denial, the King is firm in that recognition, saying: 


Plutus himself

That knows the tinct and multiplying med'cine,

Hath not in nature's mystery more science [knowledge]

Than I have in this ring. 'Twas mine, 'twas Helen's,





óAct V, scene iii, lines 101-4 


Plutus was the god of wealth, and was equated with gold in particular. It was believed in medieval times that there was some substance which could be used to turn less valuable metals into gold and this was called "the philosopher's stone." This same substance could also cure any disease and was "the elixir of life." Though medieval alchemists never found this substance, they were sure it existed in the earth, else how was the gold in its bowels formed? 
Plutus, therefore, can be spoken of as knowing the medicine (a reference to the elixir of life) that produces gold, so that it was a "multiplying med'cine" because it multiplies the earth's store of gold. 


Ö ever, ever dearly




The King begins to suspect that Bertram got the ring by foul play, that Helena was murdered. Bertram is arrested and suddenly Diana enters, claiming Bertram as her husband. 
Desperately, Bertram tries to blacken Diana as a camp follower of the army in Tuscany, and the growing confusion is only straightened out when Helena appears, alive after all. 
She shows Bertram's ring, and refers to the fact that she is now pregnant with Bertram's child. She has fulfilled Bertram's conditions and he must now accept her as his wife. Bertram cries out to the King: 


If she, my liege, can make me know this clearly,

I'll love her dearly, ever, ever dearly.





óAct V, scene Hi, lines 315-16 


Those are his last words in the play, and all's well that ends well. 








23. The Tragedy of Othello the Moor of Venice


Of the plays included in this section, Othello is the only one to represent a major Shakespearean tragedy which will bear comparison to such plays as Hamlet, Macbeth, and King Lear. It seems to have been written in 1603, after Hamlet and before the other two. 
Othello is remarkable in that its hero is a "Moor." To Shakespeare a Moor was not clearly distinguished from a black and, given the parochial feeling of Europeans of the time (and, to a large extent, since) concerning men who differed in religion (Moors) or skin color (blacks), these would serve as natural villains, with their mere difference sufficient to account for their villainy. In Titus Andronicus Aaron the Moor (see page I-401) is a villain of this sort, and in The Merchant of Venice the Prince of Morocco (see page I-520), while a valiant soldier, is scorned by Portia, who derides the color of his skin. 
In Othello, however, the Moor is pictured in another fashion, as an exotic figure who exerts a powerful sexual attraction over a white girl, partly because of the wide difference between him and the men she is accustomed to. This is not so uncommon a thing. In the early 1920s Rudolph Valentine played the title role in the motion picture The Sheik and caused millions of women to swoon in ecstasy, despite (or possibly because of) the fact that he was a "Moor" and must be a Mohammedan. 
The Moor, as an exotic and therefore romantic figure, was used by an Italian writer of tales, Giovanni Battista Giraldi, who wrote under the name of Cynthius. A hundred of his stories were collected into a book called Gli Hecatommithi (The Hundred Tales) and published in 1565. One of these stories begins: "There once lived in Venice a Moor, who was very valiant and of a handsome personÖ" No reason is given for a Moor living in Venice; no discussion as to his religion is brought out. What was needed for the story, apparently, was someone at once romantic and of a passionate southern nature. 
This story was taken by Shakespeare, who kept close to many of the details of the plot.


Ö a Florentine




The play opens in the city of Venice (see page I-499) late at night. Two Venetians are having an earnest discussion over some point that is not immediately apparent. One of them, Roderigo, is rather petulant over what he feels to be a double cross on the part of the other, Iago. 
Iago insists that he is not double-crossing, that he does indeed hate a person who is not yet identified. He gives his reasons. Influential men, it seems, have asked the unnamed to make Iago his lieutenant and have been refused. Another has been chosen for the post and he is 


Forsooth, a great arithmetician,

One Michael Cassia, a Florentine,

(A fellow almost damned in a fair wife)

That never set a squadron in the field,





óAct I, scene i, lines 16-19 


Iago is almost sick with anger at having been passed over for such a one. Cassio is an "arithmetician," that is, one who studied the art of war out of books, instead of in actual battle. And he is a Florentine rather than a Venetian, and Florence, in Shakespeare's time, was renowned for trade, rather than war. 
The reference here to Cassio's "fair wife" is a puzzling one. This wife does not appear in the play nor is she ever referred to again. In the Cynthius original, the character who is equivalent to Cassio does have a wife and perhaps Shakespeare intended to use her at first. If he did, he abandoned the idea and did not bother to correct the line. 


At Rhodes, at Cyprus. ..




Iago goes on, with gathering anger: 


And I, of whom his eyes had seen the proof

At Rhodes, at Cyprus, and on other grounds

Christian and heathen, must be belee'd and calmed





óAct I, scene i, lines 25-27 


When Venice gained territories in the eastern Mediterranean (see page I-592) she took on burdens as well, and the greatest of these was the task of opposing the Ottoman Turks, who became dominant in the Balkan peninsula and the eastern Mediterranean in the course of the fourteenth century. 
Rhodes, an island off the southeast shores of Asia, Minor, was under the rule of Italian adventurers after the Crusaders' conquest of parts of the East. It remained under Western control for nearly three centuries while Turkish power spread over Asia Minor and into the Balkans. 
In 1480 the Turkish sultan, Mohammed II, laid siege to Rhodes and was beaten off. In 1522 the later sultan, Suleiman I the Magnificent (see page I-520), finally took it. 
Cyprus is a larger island, near the eastern end of the Mediterranean. It too was captured by Crusaders, but in 1489 it came under the control of Venice. Venice's expansion over some of the shores and islands of the eastern Mediterranean involved her in wars with the Turks, and over the space of two and a half centuries there were to be five of these. 
The fourth of these wars was fought from 1570 to 1573. This was after Cynthius had written the tale Shakespeare used as model. It took place in Shakespeare's boyhood, however, and it may possibly have been in his mind as he wrote. 


Ö his Moorship's ancient Still referring to Cassio, Iago says, bitterly:

He, in good time, must his lieutenant be,

And I-God bless the mark!-his Moorship's ancient.





óAct I, scene i, lines 29-30 


Clearly now we are talking about Othello, the Moor of Venice, and Iago's scorn is seen in the twisting of "Worship" into "Moorship." An "ancient" is what we now call an "ensign" (see page II-398), a lesser position than that of lieutenant even in our own navy. We can be sure Iago is not the man to take this lying down. 


Ö the thick-lipsÖ




Roderigo comments discontentedly upon how everything seems to be going well for the Moor: 


What a full fortune does the thick-lips owe [possess] //

he can carry't thus!





óAct I, scene i, lines 63-64 


As we are soon to find out, what is bothering Roderigo is that the Moor is doing very well in his courtship of Desdemona, the lovely daughter of Brabantio, one of Venice's most powerful and wealthy senators. Roderigo would like to have Desdemona for himself. 
The use of the term "thick-lips" is the first indication that Shakespeare is talking about a true black, rather than merely a Moor of north Africa, who, despite a swarthy complexion, would not be a black. (In Cynthius' story, on the other hand, there is no indication whatsoever that the Moor was a black.) 
There are other such references. Thus, Iago's first impulse of revenge is to warn Brabantio in the coarsest possible way, so as to ensure he will take frantic action against the Moor. Before Brabantio's house they call and yell till the senator comes to the window. Then Iago shouts out his warning: 


Zounds, sir, y'are robbed! For shame.

Put on your gown! Your heart is burst, you have lost half your soul

Even now, now, very now, an old black ram

Is tupping your white ewe.





óAct I, scene i, lines 83-86 


It is to Othello, of course, that Iago refers with the phrase "old black ram." 


Ö a Barbary horse. ..




When Brabantio proves hard to persuade that his daughter has eloped with Othello, Iago, impatient of his incredulity, says: 


Because we come to do you service

and you think we are ruffians, you'll have

your daughter covered with a Barbary horse Ö





óAct I, scene i, lines 106-9 


To the ancient Greeks, all who did not speak Greek were "barbarians," and when Rome came to dominate the Mediterranean that was modified to include those who did not speak Greek or Latin. Since the most prominent barbarians in the last centuries of the Roman Empire were the German-speaking tribesmen to the north, the word came to take on a derogatory tinge and to mean "uncivilized" and "brutal" as well as merely "foreign." 
The Italians of the Renaissance period, having rediscovered the Greco-Roman pagan past, picked up the habit. To them, the Europeans north of the Alps and the Africans south of the Mediterranean were barbarians. All Europe could agree with respect to the Africans anyway, and north Africa came to be called "Barbary." The people of north Africa are still called Berbers today, and that is but another form of the word. 
Iago, in referring to Othello as a "Barbary horse," is now using Moor in its more correct sense, with reference to northern Africa rather than black Africa. 


Ö to the Sagittary Ö




Brabantio is finally persuaded to search through the house to see if his daughter is at home, and while he is doing so, Iago takes his leave so as not to be identified. Roderigo is to carry on himself and Iago leaves him instructions as to how to guide the search. He says: 


Lead to the Sagittary the raised search;

And there will I be with him.





óAct I, scene i, lines 155-56 


"Sagittary" might be the name of the inn at which Othello is lodging, but there is no clear indication of it. "Sagittary" is the equivalent of the Latin Sagittarius ("archer") and it is just possible that the name is that of an arsenal where weapons of war are stored. Venice did indeed have a famous one, and Othello, who is pictured in the play as Venice's most capable general, might well be engaged in inspection and stocktaking, even during his honeymoon. 


Ö the Signiory




Brabantio, unable to find his daughter, rouses his family and friends to take revenge on Othello. 
Meanwhile, Iago has reached Othello again and (with an appearance of bluff honesty) warns him of Brabantio's hostility. Othello, who has indeed eloped with and married Desdemona, shrugs it off, saying: 


Let him do his spite.

My services which I have done the Signiory

Shall out-tongue his complaints.





óAct I, scene ii, lines 16-18 


The Signiory is the ruling body of Venice. It comes from the same Latin root as "senior" or "senator," so that the name signifies it is a body of elders who put their experience and wisdom to the task of ruling the state. 
The government of Venice was, in many ways, the admiration of Europe.
Although originally fairly democratic, it became a closed oligarchy about 1200. From then on for six hundred years a few great families ran the state according to a rigid ideal of duty. (Of course they took, as their reward, the lion's share of the city's wealth for themselves.) In all this time there was but one dangerous revolt against the oligarchy-in 1310-and that was firmly crushed. 
Other states might have their extravagant royal families, their court intrigue, civil wars, broils, disruptions; Venice went on in the even tenor of its ways, trading, fighting, prospering, and making all its decisions in the cold light of self-interest. 
It is not surprising, then, that Shakespeare in this play portrays the government of Venice to be unemotional and coldly rational at all times. 


By JanusÖ




Othello calmly awaits the coming of Brabantio and his party. When a group of men enter with torches, it seems at first this must be they, but Iago, peering toward them, says: 


By Janus, I think no.





óAct I, scene ii, line 32 


Since Janus is commonly represented with two heads (see page I-502) and since the entire play is a demonstration of the two-facedness of Iago, it is entirely proper that he swear by Janus. 


The DukeÖ




The party that has entered turns out to be under the leadership of Cassio, Othello's new lieutenant. Cassio says to Othello: 


The Duke does greet you, general;

And he requires your haste-post haste appearance

Even on the instant.





óAct I, scene ii, lines 35-37 


The north Italian word for "duke" is "doge," and this form of the word is associated primarily with Venice (though Genoa also had its doges). 
The first Doge of Venice assumed the position possibly as early as 697. The last Doge stepped down in 1797, when Napoleon cavalierly put an end to the Venetian republic. There had been a continuous line of doges for eleven centuries, a most amazing record.
The most unusual doge on the whole list is Enrico Dandolo, who assumed the position in 1192 at the age of eighty-four. Not only was he old, but he was blind as well, yet in 1203 (when he was ninety-five!) he was the indomitable leader of the Crusaders' expedition against Constantinople and carried that expedition through to victory. 
In later centuries, though, the Doge was pretty much a figurehead and it was the impersonal oligarchy, the Signiory, that ran the republic. 


Ö the sooty bosom




Before Othello can answer the summons, Brabantio and his party arrive. Angrily, Brabantio accuses Othello of having used enchantment, as otherwise his daughter couldn't possibly have 


Run from her guardage to the sooty bosom

Of such a thing as thou-to fear, not to delight.





óAct I, scene ii, lines 69-70 


Again a reference to Othello as a black. Othello, noble, powerful, accomplished, high in all men's regard, would be a good match for the girl but for his skin color. Yet it is interesting that Brabantio makes no mention of religion. Nor is the matter of religion mentioned anywhere in the play. 
And yet if we take Othello seriously and don't dismiss it as simply a romance in which we need not peer too closely at the details, we must suppose that Othello was born a Mohammedan. It is inconceivable that the Venetians would trust a Mohammedan to lead their armed forces against the Mohammedan Turks; we must therefore further assume that Othello was a converted Christian. 


Ö the general enemy Ottoman




For a while it seems that fighting will break out, but Othello preserves a magnificent calm and, in any case, Brabantio too has been summoned to the Signiory. 
In the council chamber, the Signiory is gravely considering the news that a Turkish fleet is at sea, with its destination uncertain. Calmly, they weigh what evidence they have and decide the Turks are aiming for Cyprus. 
When Othello enters, the Duke says: 


Valiant Othello, we must straight [immediately] employ you

Against the general enemy Ottoman.





óAct I, scene iii, lines 48-49 


There have been numerous tribes of Turks who have made their mark in history, and those against whom the Crusaders fought in the twelfth century were the Seljuk Turks. 
Two centuries later a group of Turks under Osman I (or Othman, in Arabic) began to win successes. The particular Turks under this ruler and under his successors were called Osmanli Turks or, more commonly, though incorrectly, Ottoman Turks. It was under the Ottoman rule that Turkish power reached its heights. 
Under Orkhan I, the son of Osman I, all of Asia Minor was taken, and in 1345 Orkhan took advantage of a civil war among the Byzantines to cross over the Dardanelles. Thus the Turk entered Europe, never to leave. 
In 1453 the Ottoman Turks took Constantinople and by Shakespeare's time they ruled a vast empire covering western Asia, northern Africa, and southeastern Europe. It had passed its peak at the time Othello was written but so slightly that the decline was not yet visible, and it still seemed (and was) the most powerful state in Europe. 


The Anthropophagi Ö




It is only after speaking to Othello that the Duke notices Brabantio, who instantly pours forth his tale of anger and woe, accusing the Moor once again of having used enchantment. 
Othello offers to send for Desdemona so that she might bear witness herself and meanwhile gives his own account. He has often been a guest at Brabantio's house, he says, and at his host's request would tell of his adventurous life and the strange things he has seen: 


.. .of the Cannibals that each other eat,

The Anthropophagi, and men whose heads

Grew beneath their shoulders.





óAct I, scene iii, lines 142-44 


"Anthropophagi" is Greek for "man-eaters." The word "cannibal" came into use only after Columbus' voyage, when man-eating habits were discovered among a group of Indians inhabiting the smaller islands of what are now called the West Indies. One of the names given them was "Caniba," and from that came "cannibal." 
Actually, Shakespeare is taking a little bit out of Pliny here. 
Gaius Plinius Secundus (the full name of the writer commonly called Pliny the Elder) was a Roman scholar who lived in the first century a.d. He was a prolific writer who tried to prepare a one-man encyclopedia of human knowledge culled from all the writers he could get hold of. In a.d 77 he published a thirty-seven-volume book called Natural History which digested two thousand ancient books and which was translated into English in 1601 (just two years before Othello was written) by Philemon Holland. 
Pliny accepted rumors and travelers' tales and much of what he included was a farrago of legend and distortion, but all was so wondrous and interesting that the volumes survived the vicissitudes that followed the fall of the ancient world when other, more serious volumes did not. 
Othello explains how Desdemona listened to his tales and came first to admire him and then to love him. Desdemona arrives and bears out Othello's tale, and Brabantio must give in. But in doing so, he sardonically warns that since Desdemona has proven capable of deceiving her father, she might deceive her husband as well. 


H'as done my office




All leave but Roderigo and Iago. Roderigo is in despair, for Othello seems to have won utterly. Iago, on the other hand, is not concerned. He has contempt for women and it seems to him that Desdemona cannot long remain in love with an old Moor. All Roderigo has to do is go to Cyprus with plenty of money (which, of course, Iago intends to charm into his own pockets) and wait his chance. 
Then when Roderigo leaves too, Iago ruminates on the Moor and on his own plans for revenge, saying: 


/ hate the Moor

And it is thought abroad that 'twixt my sheets

H'as done my office. I know not if't be true,

But I, for mere suspicion in that kind,

Will do, as if for surety.




óAct I, scene iii, lines 377-81 


This must be nonsense. From all we can guess about Othello from the picture Shakespeare paints, he is not this sort of man. But Iago, intent on revenge, is busy working up his sense of grievance and will seize upon anything to do so. The revenge must involve Cassio as well. He says: 


Cassia's a proper [handsome] man.

Let me see now: To get his placeÖ





óAct I, scene iii, lines 383-84 


And he gets his idea.


Ö Our wars are done




The scene shifts to Cyprus, where Montano, the Venetian governor, is awaiting events. There has been a great storm, which two Gentlemen on watch have witnessed. That tempest has, however, also served to abort the Turkish menace. A Third Gentlemen enters and says: 


News, lads! Our wars are done.

The desperate tempest hath so banged the Turks

That their designment [intention] halts.





óAct II, scene i, lines 20-22 


There is no further mention of military matters and Othello has no chance to display his quality as a general. That is too bad, for thirty years before the play was written there had been a Venetian-Turkish war that would have offered a good model for a battle. 
In 1570, when Shakespeare was six years old, Turkish forces had indeed invaded Cyprus, as in Othello they had merely threatened to do. 
Venice, which controlled the island at the time, felt she could not face Turkey alone. She appealed for help to the Pope, who in turn appealed to the most dedicated of all the Catholic monarchs in Europe, Philip II of Spam. 
While the Christian forces of Europe were slowly gathering for the counterattack, the Turks were advancing in Cyprus and were steadily beating back the Venetians. Nicosia, in the center of the island (and the capital of modern Cyprus), was taken on September 9, 1570, while Famagusta on the eastern shore was under siege. Turkish vessels penetrated the Adriatic. 
It wasn't till the summer of 1571 that the Christian fleet was ready to sail and challenge the Turks. The fleet was put under the command of Don John of Austria, an illegitimate half brother of Philip II. 
Famagusta had fallen, meanwhile, and in October 1571 the Turkish fleet was concentrated near a city on the northern shore of the Gulf of Corinth, a city which to Italian traders was known as Lepanto. It was six hundred miles northwest of Cyprus and seven hundred miles southeast of Venice itself. 
On October 7, 1571, the allied fleet reached Lepanto and attacked the Turks in the last great battle to be fought with galleys, that is, by large ships driven by banks of oars. There were nearly 500 ships on both sides carrying over 60,000 soldiers in addition to the oarsmen. The Venetian ships distinguished themselves in the fighting that followed, and, in the end, it was a great Christian victory. About 50 Turkish galleys were destroyed and 117 captured. Thousands of Christian slaves were liberated, and the news that the invincible Turks had been catastrophically defeated electrified Europe. 
And yet Shakespeare did not make use of such an event. He might have allowed Othello to defeat the Turks offstage and gain a Lepanto-like victory as easily as he allowed the storm to do the job. 
But then Lepanto must surely have seemed less glorious in England than elsewhere. It was a victory for Philip II of Spain, who was England's great enemy in Shakespeare's time. In 1588, only seventeen years after Lepanto, he had launched a huge Armada against England. The English defeated it and what was left of the Spanish fleet was destroyed in a storm. 
It was the storm that defeated Philip II, rather than the earlier battle that gave him victory, that may have been in Shakespeare's mind. 


King StephenÖ




One by one the Venetians arrive at Cyprus, having weathered the storm. First Cassio, then Desdemona, Iago, and Roderigo, and finally Othello. Othello, completely happy to be with his Desdemona, to have Cyprus safe, and the Turks gone, proclaims a holiday. 
Now it is up to Iago to use that holiday as an excuse to get Cassio drunk -the first step in his plan. 
Iago sets up a drinking party. Cassio protests he has a weak head for liquor but Iago will not listen. In no tune there is drinking, comic songs, and foolish prattle. At one point, Iago sings a song that begins: 


King Stephen was and a worthy peer;

His breeches cost him but a crown;





óAct II, scene iii, lines 86-87 


It is a nonsense song, brought to Iago's mind by talk of England, and England did indeed have a King Stephen. 
In 1135 King Henry I died, leaving as an heir a single daughter named Matilda. The nobility did not approve of a woman ruler, however, and turned to the old King's nephew, Stephen. 
Stephen was crowned and kept his throne till his death in 1154. His reign, however, was a disastrous one. There was almost continuous civil war, first with Matilda and then with her son, Henry. Scotland took advantage of England's troubles to extend her sway southward, and the English nobility grew turbulent and independent of the crown. 
And yet Stephen was a genial, good-natured man who was popular with the people, especially the Londoners, and might well have inspired good-natured comic songs in his honor. 


Ö ay many mouths as HydraÖ




And now the plot begins to work. Cassio, quickly drunk, staggers away. Iago had earlier arranged with Roderigo to have him pick a fight with Cassio, and meanwhile he tells Montano, with apparent reluctance and great concern, that Cassio is often drunk. 
Roderigo comes running back, with Cassio in clamorous pursuit. Montano tries to restrain Cassio and in no time they are fighting and Montano is wounded. Iago sends Roderigo to set the alarm bell ringing and soon Othello, roused from bed, is on the scene. 
Othello wants to know what happened and Iago tells him accurately, omitting only the fact that he himself had arranged everything. Othello has no choice but to discharge Cassio. 
Yet Iago's game is not over; it is merely beginning. Cassio's discharge is well and good and now Iago may become lieutenant in his place. By now, though, Iago is after bigger game and cannot be stopped. 
Critics have often maintained that Iago lacks real motive for his villainy and continues out of "motiveless malignity." It seems to me, however, that this simply isn't so. To many people there is a fierce delight in pulling strings, in the feeling of power that comes out of making others into marionettes whom one can manipulate at will. 
The excellent results of Iago's maneuvering, so far, had whetted his appetite for more of the same, and we might suppose that by this time Iago could even forget his own wrongs in the sheer delight of watching himself twitch those about him into annihilation. 
Thus, he twitches another string and encourages Cassio to hope for rehabilitation. But poor Cassio is too abashed to approach Othello. He says: 


/ will ask him for my place again:

he shall tell me 1 am a drunkard.

Had I as many mouths as Hydra, such an answer would stop them all.





óAct II, scene iii, lines 302-4 


The Hydra is the many-headed monster whom Hercules slew in the second of his twelve labors (see page I-237). 
Iago, however, has the cure for Cassio's pessimism and pulls another string. All Cassio need do is ask Desdemona to intercede with Othello, and he can reach Desdemona through her lady in waiting, Emilia, who happens to be Iago's wife. With the dawn of hope, Cassio agrees to try. 


Ö the green-eyed monster. ..




The plan begins well. Cassio sees Emilia and then Desdemona, and the latter agrees to intercede with Othello.
As Cassio leaves Desdemona, however, Iago and Othello arrive on the scene and Iago, looking after Cassio, mutters: 


Ha! I like not that.





óAct III, scene iii, line 34 


He won't explain himself, but it is enough to insert the first uncertainty into Othello's mind concerning Desdemona and Cassio. Then, when Desdemona begins to plead for Cassio, that can but increase the uncertainty. 
After Desdemona leaves, Iago, with infinite cleverness, manages to fire Othello into jealousy by the very manner in which he himself refuses to say anything. The very show of reluctance on Iago's part gives Othello the greater room for imagining the worse, and Iago warns him in terms that but feed his fear, saying: 


O, beware, my lord, of jealousy!

It is the green-eyed monster, which doth mock

The meat it feeds on.





óAct III, scene iii, lines 165-67 


Because of these verses, the expression "green-eyed monster" has become a common metaphor signifying jealousy and its mundane meaning is lost. The "green-eyed monster" is obviously the cat, which plays with the mouse it catches, releasing it only to catch it again, over and over. In the same way, jealousy torments the one who experiences it, for he cannot ever be made secure. Every proof to the contrary releases him only briefly, till some new incident rouses the jealousy again. 


Ö her jessesÖ




Othello understands the torments of jealousy and he will not sit still to be a prey to it. He will have the matter put to the test, either to be proven or disproven. After Iago has left, he muses: 


// I do prove her haggard,

Though that her jesses were my dear heartstrings,

I'd whistle her off and let her down the wind





óAct III, scene iii, lines 259-61 


The language used here is that of falconry. In medieval times it was an aristocratic sport to train falcons, hawks, and other birds of prey to hunt game, and, like every other specialized activity, it developed its own vocabulary.
A haggard is an untamed hawk; one that is caught after it is adult so that any taming is superficial and so that there always remains a tendency to revert to the wild. Jesses are small leather straps around the hawk's leg which are usually supplied with a ring that can be attached to the glove on the hawker's hand. To whistle her off would be to let her go. 
Actually, though, Othello is already convinced of Desdemona's infidelity. When she comes in to call him gaily to dinner, she sees something is wrong and asks if anything ails him. He answers, ominously: 


/ have a pain upon my forehead, here.





óAct III, scene iii, line 283 


He touches his forehead, and to the Elizabethan audience, any reference to the forehead means the horns that sprout there and signify cuckoldry. 
The innocent Desdemona offers him her handkerchief to bind his head but he pushes it roughly away and it falls to the ground unnoticed by her. 
The handkerchief is a very special one, a gift to Desdemona from Othello. Now it lies there and Emilia picks it up. Her husband, Iago, had often asked her to steal it for him (we are not told why) and now she can give it to him. 
Iago is elated on receiving it. He sees how he can use it in his plan. When Othello enters, Iago muses with grim satisfaction on the perturbed appearance of the general. He says to himself, concerning Othello: 


Not poppy nor mandragora,

Nor all the drowsy syrups of the world,

Shall ever medicine thee to that sweet sleep

Which thou owedst [possessed] yesterday.





óAct III, scene iii, lines 327-30 


There has always been a use for the equivalent of tranquilizers, for there have always been tensions. Before the days of modern chemistry, tranquil-izing herbs were found in nature, and of these the chief was a certain species of poppy which was originally grown along the shores of the eastern Mediterranean for the sake of its edible seeds. 
Undoubtedly, other parts of the plant were nibbled on and it must have been noticed that nibbling the fruit eased small pains and discomforts, reduced tension, and encouraged sleep. It was eventually discovered that one could express juice from the fruit and use that as a sedative. The Greek word opion is a diminutive form of the word for juice, and in Latin that becomes opium.
One wonders if the famous lotus-eaters in the Odyssey, who ate of the lotus and wished nothing more than to dream away their lives in tranquil content, were not really poppy-eaters. 
There is a less exaggerated mention in the Odyssey of a tranquilizing drug. When Helen and Menelaus are hosts to Telemachus (the son of Ulysses) in Sparta, they serve wine to which Helen adds a drug "that banishes all care, sorrow, and ill humor." A little opium might do that too. In Greek, the name of the drug Helen uses is nepenthes, meaning "no sorrow." 
As for mandragora, that is an older form of mandrake (see page I-336). 


Ö the Pontic Sea




Othello's state of mind has brought Iago himself to danger, for in his present frenzy, he demands proof or he will have Iago's life. Without flinching, Iago makes up the necessary lie. He says he once shared a bed with Cassio, who talked in his sleep and revealed his affair with Desdemona. He then adds the climactic bit when he says that the handkerchief Othello gave Desdemona is now in the possession of Cassio. 
That does it. Othello is reduced to such a pitch of mad fury that he cries for blood. Coolly, Iago urges Othello to be patient and his intentness on revenge may vanish. But Othello says: 


Never, Iago. Like to the Pontic Sea,

Whose icy current and compulsive course

Nev'r keeps retiring ebb, but keeps due on

To the Propontic and the Hellespont,

Even so my bloody thoughts, with violent pace,

Shall nev'r look back, nev'r ebb to humble love,





óAct III, scene iii, lines 450-57 


The "Pontic Sea" is the Black Sea, which is connected to the Mediterranean through narrow straits. At its southwest corner is the Bosporus, about twenty miles long and no more than half a mile wide at its narrowest. It runs just about north and south and at its southern end widens out into a small body of water which we call the Sea of Marmara. (The ancient Greeks called it the "Propontis," meaning "before the Pontus," since a Greek traveler leaving the Aegean Sea must travel through the Propontis before getting to the Pontus.) 
The Propontis narrows to a second strait, the Dardanelles, or, to the Greeks, the Hellespont (see page I-466). 
The Mediterranean Sea, into which the Hellespont opens, is a warm sea. The sun beats down upon it and sometimes the hot, dry winds blow northward out of the Sahara Desert. Much water is lost by evaporation and only a small part of it is replaced by river water. Only one major river flows into the Mediterranean and that is the Nile; and after its long trip through desert regions not as much water is delivered into the Mediterranean by the Nile as one might suppose from the length of the river. The other rivers that flow into the Mediterranean-the Ebro, Rhone, Po, Tiber -don't count for much, despite their historic associations. 
The result is that if the Mediterranean were existing in isolation it would gradually dry and shrink to a smaller size than it is. 
It is quite otherwise with the Black Sea, which is distinctly cooler than the Mediterranean and free of the Saharan winds. There is less evaporation, to begin with. This smaller amount of evaporation is more than made up for by the giant rivers that flow into it-the Danube, Dniester, Bug, Dnieper, and Don. 
If the Black Sea existed in isolation, it would overflow. 
The result is that the waters of the Black Sea pass constantly through the straits and pour ceaselessly into the Mediterranean without ever any ebb to this steady flow, and it is to this that Othello refers. (Water is also constantly pouring into the Mediterranean Sea from the Atlantic Ocean through the Strait of Gibraltar.) 


Ö my lieutenant




Othello intends death now, as soon as the case is proved. He orders Iago to arrange the assassination of Cassio. Iago now has everything he wants. Cassio has been amply paid back for daring to move over his head-to the death. Othello has been destroyed; the noble general he once was he can never be again. 
There remains Desdemona. She has not offended Iago. He seems to have a momentary qualm about her. When Othello orders him to kill Cassio, Iago says: 


'Tis done at your request.

But let her live.





óAct III, scene iii, lines 471-72 


Yet the immediate effect of this is to drive Othello further into his maddened rage, so that he cries out: 


Damn her, lewd minx! O, damn her! Damn her!

Come, go with me apart. I will withdraw

To furnish me with some swift means of death

For the fair devil. Now art thou my lieutenant





óAct III, scene iii, lines 472-75


We might even imagine that Iago's soft request for mercy was designed to provoke this anger; that without any personal hatred for Desdemona at all, he nevertheless enjoyed pushing the buttons. 


A sibyl.. .




Desdemona has by now realized she has lost her handkerchief and is very disturbed. Othello (testing whether she has given it to Cassio, as Iago said) asks for it, and the nervous Desdemona, forced to admit she doesn't have it on her person, is afraid to say she has lost it. Othello harshly warns her that the handkerchief is important; it has magic properties and is a love charm: 


A sibyl that had numbered in the world

The sun to course two hundred compasses,

In her prophetic fury sewed the work;





óAct III, scene iv, lines 70-72 


The aged sibyl is an image used often by Shakespeare (see page I-452), and we may well believe that Othello accepts the truth of sibyls as he does of Pliny's wonders. 
Still Desdemona can't produce the handkerchief and still she fearfully denies it is lost. Othello stalks off in a rage. 


Ö would prove a crocodile




Iago now sets about supplying the last touch. He has planted the handkerchief in Cassio's chambers. Cassio finds it, likes it, and gives it to his mistress, Bianca (a courtesan), to copy over so that he will have a similar handkerchief after he returns this one to its rightful owner, whoever that might be. 
Iago then finds occasion to draw Cassio aside, with Othello watching from a place where he can see but not hear. Iago teases Cassio with the great love Bianca has for him. Cassio preens and smirks with the usual male self-satisfaction over such matters and Othello can only assume (in his fevered state) that he is laughing over his amour with Desdemona. 
And then Bianca enters and throws the handkerchief back at Cassio, for she has decided it must belong to another one of his girlfriends. Of course, Othello recognizes it at once and the case is proven for him. The handkerchief he gave to Desdemona, she gave to Cassio, who thinks so little of it he passes it on to a courtesan. Othello is ready to kill Desdemona.
But the outside world intervenes. A deputation of important Venetian officials has arrived under the leadership of one Ludovico. They bring a message recalling Othello to Venice now that the war danger is gone and appointing Cassio as his successor. 
Othello greets them with the necessary ceremony but is so far gone in his jealous madness that he cannot put a good face on matters even for the sake of the Venetian deputation. When Desdemona innocently tries to speak in Cassio's favor to the Venetians, Othello strikes her. 
The horrified Ludovico upbraids Othello and exclaims at the sight of the weeping Desdemona. But the raving Othello says: 


O devil, devil!

If that the earth could teem with woman's tears,

Each drop she falls would prove a crocodile.





óAct IV, scene i, lines 244-46 


In other words, if tears falling to earth could act as semen to make the earth pregnant and bring forth life, Desdemona's tears would cause it to bring forth crocodiles. 
This refers to a well-known legend concerning crocodiles. (Othello is a veritable compendium of legends.) Crocodiles were supposed to moan and sigh, so that passers-by might think human beings in distress were somewhere nearby. If any were softhearted enough, or curious enough, to turn aside in search of them, the crocodile's jaws snapped shut, and it would then continue to weep even while eating. 
The story is quite untrue, but the phrase "crocodile tears" has entered the language to represent any form of hypocritical grief. The implication is that Desdemona's modesty and virtue are tissues of hypocrisy. The irony, of course, is that the play is filled with crocodile tears; they are all Iago's and Othello doesn't see them. 


Ö into Mauritania.. .




When Othello stalks off, Ludovico wonders if he is sane, and Iago seizes the opportunity to encourage that thought of possible insanity without actually committing himself to it. 
But by now Iago has almost more strings in his hand than he can properly handle. Thus, when Othello takes himself to Desdemona's chamber to give her a bitter tongue-lashing, Emilia openly wonders if Othello might not be the victim of malicious slander. Then too, Roderigo has been gulled and robbed by Iago to the point where he can take no more. He threatens to talk to Desdemona directly and request the return of his jewels. 
We can be pretty sure that Desdemona has never received any jewels but that Iago, as go-between, has kept them. Iago, therefore, must begin to shut mouths. 
He begins by promising Roderigo that he will have Desdemona the very next night if he can manage to keep Othello on the island that long. Iago explains that Othello has been recalled and ordered to a distant country (another lie). This is to force Roderigo to act, for it will seem to him that Desdemona is about to move utterly beyond his grasp. Iago says: 


Ö he [Othello] goes into Mauritania

and taketh away with him the fair Desdemona,

unless his abode be lingered here by some accident;





óAct IV, scene ii, lines 224-26 


Mauritania was the name given in ancient times to the northwest shoulder of Africa, the region now called Morocco. It may be used here as a vague term, meaning "land of the Moors," that is, north Africa generally. 
Iago arranges to have Roderigo attempt to find occasion to kill Cassio, since the death of Othello's appointed successor would force the Moor to remain on the island for a while. (From Iago's standpoint, this will get rid of the hated Cassio, and Othello has ordered him to do that; and he will find occasion, we can well imagine, to take care of Roderigo too.) 


Ö that Promethean heat




Matters now rush to their horrible climax. It is night and Desdemona, in almost unbearable depression, goes to bed. 
Cassio, returning from time spent with his ladylove, is set upon by Roderigo. They fight and both are wounded. Men come running, and Iago, finding that Cassio is not dead, makes the best of matters by killing Roderigo and shutting his mouth at least. 
While that is going on, Othello is trying to do his part. He comes upon Desdemona sleeping and even now finds he still hesitates. He looks from the candle he carries to the sleeping woman and says: 


// / quench thee, thou flaming minister,

I can again thy former light restore,

Should I repent me; but once put out thy light,

Thou cunning'st pattern of excelling nature,

I know not where is that Promethean heat

That can thy light relume.





óAct V, scene ii, lines 8-13 


Prometheus, in the Greek myths, had first made man the gift of fire, stealing it from the sun (see page I-437). A later myth also made him the creator of man. He was supposed to have made clay models into which he breathed life. 
Othello's reference to "Promethean heat" is therefore a double-barreled allusion. It refers to Prometheus' connection with the sun's fire; not just ordinary fire but a special kind. Secondly, it refers to Prometheus' ability to infuse cold and lifeless clay with the warmth of a living human body; and that ability Othello lacks. 


Ö the very error of the moon




Othello no longer raves. He goes about the task of killing with a cold sorrow. Desdemona wakes and Othello accuses her of having given the handkerchief to Cassio. He will not accept her denial but tells her Cassio is dead (he assumes Iago has done his work properly), and Desdemona's terror at that news seems to him to be the final admission. 
He strangles her with her pillow and even while he is forcing his weight down on her fragile neck, there is a clamor at the door. Emilia demands entrance. Othello closes the bed curtains and lets her in. Emilia has come to tell of the deadly fight between Roderigo and Cassio. 
Othello says calmly: 


It is the very error of the moon.

She comes more nearer earth than she was wont

And makes men mad.





óAct V, scene ii, lines 108-10 


It has always been tempting to think that changes in the heavens bring about analogous changes on the earth (something that is the basis of the pseudo science of astrology). The regular changes of the moon from new to full and back again would seem to imply that certain passions or foibles of men would wax and wane in sympathy. 
In particular, mental abnormalities would wax with the moon, and there are the well-known legends that men turn into werewolves under the full moon, that witchcraft is most dangerous then, and so on. Spells of madness would vary with the moon's phases too by this line of thought, and the very word "lunatic" is derived from the Latin word for the moon. 
And of course, if the moon approached more closely to the earth than usual, its effects would be multiplied.


Ö towards his feet. ..




But now Othello finds out Cassio is not killed, merely wounded. That staggers him. 
A faint cry from the bed reveals that Desdemona is not quite dead, either. She lives only long enough to try one last time to shield Othello, and weakly claims she killed herself. 
Othello, trying desperately to cling to the certainty that he did the right thing, boldly proclaims he killed her for her infidelity, and now Emilia comes into her own. She shrieks her utter faith in Desdemona's virtue. 
Others, including Iago, come bursting in in response to Emilia's cries and find Desdemona dead. Iago must admit he told Othello of Desdemona's unfaithfulness, and now comes his doom. The matter of the handkerchief comes up and Emilia reveals the truth. She had found the handkerchief and given it to Iago. 
Then-too late, too late-Othello understands. He tries to kill Iago, who evades him, stabs Emilia, and runs. 
Emilia dies, but Iago is brought back a prisoner. Othello looks at him through the hellish mist that now surrounds him and says, brokenly: 


/ look down towards his feet-but that's a fable.





óAct V, scene ii, line 282 


This takes us back to one of the more joyous aspects of the pagan religions of the Greeks and Romans. They peopled the woods and wilds with spirits representing the free, animal fertility of life. The Greek satyrs and the Roman fauns were pictured as men with goats' horns and hindquarters, possibly because goats were always pictured as lustful animals. (Then too, goats may well have been the first creatures to be domesticated for meat and milk and it was important that they be lustful and multiply.) The most important of the satyrs was Pan himself. 
The sexually strait-laced Jews (and, later, Christians) viewed all fertility deities with disapproval and suspicion, and to the Jews the satyrs (or similar creatures in Eastern cults) were sairrim, which the King James Bible translates as "devils." They tempted mankind to sin. 
The devil, Satan, is usually pictured, even today, with horns, tail, and other goatish characteristics. He is still a satyr or, in particular, Pan. Medieval legends had it that the devil could take on many undevilish disguises, but that he could not abandon all his marks. Whatever he did, there remained one trace of goatishness; that is, a goat's cloven hoof. Hence the expression "to show the cloven hoof," meaning to reveal the hidden evil in one's character. 
Othello looks toward Iago's feet to see the cloven hoof that would indicate the devil and interrupts himself mournfully with his "-but that's a fable." 
He has learned! Till now he has believed the fables from Pliny, he has believed in magic handkerchiefs and sibyls, in crocodiles and moon-bred lunacy-and, of course, in Iago too. 
Now, for the first time, he has discovered the necessity of skepticism-far too late. 


Demand me nothing. ..




As all of Iago's lies and trickeries are exposed, the confused Othello wants to know but one thing. Why did Iago do it? The audience wants to know too, since the revenge went far beyond anything necessary to punish Iago's grievances. But Iago says: 


Demand me nothing.

What you know, you know.

From this time forth I never will speak word.





óAct V, scene ii, lines 299-300 


Ludovico threatens to make him talk under torture, but it seems reasonable to suppose that no torture will make Iago talk. This failure to say why has irritated many, but, in my opinion, it should not. Iago's pleasure at manipulating lives was intense and it is something we can all understand, for, in a much milder way, it is present in all men-and yet it is not something that can be easily explained. 


Ö the base JudeanÖ




Now it is only necessary to take Othello back to Venice so that he might be tried for murder. 
Othello, however, has one last thing to say. With an effort, he manages to pull himself together into almost the man he once was and speaks once more, a little in self-pity, much more in self-hate. He asks them all to tell the tale honestly, saying: 


Then must you speak

Of one that loved not wisely, but too well;

Of one not easily jealous, but, being wrought,

Perplexed in the extreme; of one whose hand,

Like the base Judean, threw a pearl away

Richer than all his tribeÖ





óAct V, scene ii, lines 339-44


In many editions of the play, the phrase "like the base Judean" is made to read "like the base Indian." It seems to me that "Judean" is much the more preferable. If "Indian" is used, the allusion is obscure; if "Judean" is used, it is brilliantly apparent. 
In Matthew 13:45-46, Jesus is reported as saying "Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto a merchant man, seeking goodly pearls: Who, when he had found one pearl of great price, went and sold all that he had, and bought it." 
It is easy to envision Jesus (who, in the Christian view, represented the kingdom of heaven) as being the pearl of great price more valuable than all else in the world besides. The Jews, in rejecting Jesus as the Messiah, would then be pictured as throwing away the pearl of great price. In particular, Judas, who betrayed Jesus, would be the "base Judean." 
From this point of view, the extent of Othello's self-hatred is clear. He compares his murder of Desdemona with the crucifixion of Jesus, and himself with Judas. 


Ö in Aleppo once Othello goes on to say:

And say besides that in Aleppo once,

Where a malignant and a turbaned Turk

Beat a Venetian and traduced the state,

I took by th'throat the circumcised dog

And smote him-thus.





óAct V, scene ii, lines 348-52 


With the last word, before anyone can stop him, Othello stabs himself, falls upon Desdemona in a final kiss, and dies. 
This last pathetic passage cannot be taken literally. Aleppo is a city in what is now northwestern Syria, and (except for a brief period in 969) it has been Moslem for over thirteen centuries. If Othello killed a Turk in Aleppo, he was killing him in the midst of a city of Turks and it is not likely he would have got away alive. 
He must mean something elseÖ 
The Moslems and Jews were marked off from the Christians by being circumcised; that is, a flap of skin at the end of the penis was removed. "Uncircumcised dog" was a common derogatory phrase for Christians among the Moslems, indicating that they were outside the pale of the true religion. Othello's use of the reverse phrase in his last agony is like a return to his origins.
After all, if Othello was Moslem originally, conversion to Christianity in later life could not utterly wipe out the tricks of speech he had learned as a young man. Furthermore, he would still be circumcised; baptism may cause one to be born again in the spiritual sense, but it cannot grow a new foreskin. 
Othello therefore pictures himself as having returned to his origins, of having forgotten the Christian virtues of forgiveness, of having become "a malignant and a turbaned Turk." He beat a Venetian (Desdemona). He also traduced (defamed) himself; robbing himself of his own fame and reputation by his actions; and insofar as he was the representative of the state in Cyprus, he traduced the state. 
So he took by the throat "the circumcised dog" (himself) and killed him. 


O Spartan dog




It is the end. The destruction has been complete, and Iago's plot has worked itself out to the final bit. That Iago himself is trapped and is to be destroyed by torture must seem quite irrelevant to him. The victory is his. 
Ludovico says to Iago bitterly: 


O Spartan dog,

More jell than anguish, hunger, or the sea!

Look on the tragic loading of this bed.

This is thy work.





óAct V, scene ii, lines 357-60 


A "Spartan dog" is a bloodhound, one that is trained to hunt and kill, and therefore a cruel and bloodthirsty person. 
But does Ludovico expect Iago's conscience to be touched? It is precisely "the tragic loading of this bed" that is his victory, and one can imagine that Iago, wounded and pinioned and with the certainty of agonizing torture awaiting him, must, as he looks upon the bed, smile. 
So the play ends-and the manner of its ending reflects history too, in a way, for all that the play is utter fiction from beginning to end. 
The Battle of Lepanto, however much of a glorious victory it seemed to Europeans, and however much of a psychological boost it gave them, had no military value. Within a year the Turks had replaced their losses and were as powerful as ever at sea. The Christian allies, having won their victory, quarreled among themselves and did nothing more. The Venetians were left to face the Turks alone. The war on Cyprus continued to go against them, and in 1573 the Venetians yielded and ceded Cyprus to the Turks, who were to keep it for three centuries. 
And so, just as Othello's coming to Cyprus may be compared to the victory at Lepanto, so his death seems to signify the valuelessness of that victory and the ultimate loss of Cyprus to the enemy. 








24. Measure For Measure





In this play, written in 1604, Shakespeare takes the opportunity to study the relationship of justice and mercy. He had done so in The Merchant of Venice, but there he had not been consistent. Portia had demanded mercy of Shylock, but when the tables were turned she did not show it (see page I-539). 
We all favor mercy for those with whom we sympathize, but are not nearly as keen when mercy is sought for those we hate. In this play Shakespeare carries through the notion of mercy to ultimate consistency, and in offering mercy to the villain makes many critics unhappy. In presenting an unpleasant situation so that the offering of mercy becomes hard indeed, more critics are made unhappy. The result is that Shakespeare's great play of mercy is usually considered one of his unpleasant comedies, like All's Well That Ends Well. 


.. any in ViennaÖ




The setting of the play is in Austria. This setting Shakespeare takes over from a tale by Cynthius; a tale from the same collection, in fact, from which he had a year earlier or less taken the plot for Othello (see page I-609). 
Cynthius' tale begins with the Emperor Maximian appointing a new judge over the city of Innsbruck. There was a real Emperor Maximian who ruled over the Roman Empire, along with Diocletian, from 286 to 305, but there is no indication that the play takes place in Roman tunes. 
The name may have been inspired to Cynthius by the fact that two Holy Roman emperors named Maximilian ruled in the sixteenth century. The first, Maximilian I, ruled from 1493 to 1519, and the second, Maximilian II, became Emperor in 1564. He was on the throne when Cynthius' collection was published in 1565. 
The two Maximilians, like all the emperors after 1438, were members of the House of Habsburg, who ruled, specifically, as archdukes of Austria. 
Shakespeare shifts the scene from Innsbruck, a provincial town in western Austria, to Vienna, the capital, but he is writing a Renaissance romance, and all the characters have Italian names. Thus, the Archduke of Austria and presumably Holy Roman Emperor (but referred to only as "Duke" in the play) is Vincentio. 
The Duke is planning to retire for a while from the tasks of government and intends to appoint a deputy to wield his powers. He suggests his candidate to an aged lord, Escalus, who approves and says: 


// any in Vienna be of worth

To undergo such ample grace and honor

It is Lord Angela.





óAct I, scene i, lines 22-24 


Angela is given the post, though he is reluctant, and the Duke then leaves in great haste. 


Ö the King of Hungary Ö




The scene then shifts to a Viennese street, where we are introduced to Lucio, who is listed in the cast of characters as "a fantastic." He is fantastic in costume and conversation, in other words; he is avant-garde, ahead of the fashion, a gay man about town. 
He is talking to two unnamed Gentlemen and says: 


// the Duke, with the other dukes,

come not to composition with theKing of Hungary,

why then all the dukes fall upon the King.





óAct I, scene ii, lines 1-3 


Nothing further is mentioned of this, of any threat of war, of the King of Hungary; nor is there any hint as to who "the other dukes" might be. 
Hungary is Austria's eastern neighbor. Through the Middle Ages it was an extensive and often powerful kingdom which was, however, weakened by the existence of a turbulent aristocracy whose quarrels among themselves worked to the ruin of all. 
Hungary had reached its height a little over a century before Measure for Measure was written, when, from 1458 to 1490, Mathias Corvinus ruled. He temporarily broke the power of the Hungarian nobility, spread his power northward over Slovakia and Silesia, and in 1485 even conquered Vienna. He made Vienna his capital and ruled over Austria. 
Corvinus died in 1490 and his weak successor gave up the earlier conquests and let the nobility gradually regain their power. The real disaster, however, came in 1526, when the Ottoman Turks (see page I-520) invaded Hungary and destroyed the Hungarian army at the Battle of Mohacs. By 1540 the major part of Hungary had been made part of the Ottoman Empire and the western fringe was taken over by the Austrian Duke, Ferdinand I. 


Ö nineteen zodiacsÖ




The talk shifts almost at once to internal affairs. It seems that a wave of puritanism is sweeping over Vienna and a moral crackdown is in process. Older laws against sexual immorality, which had been allowed to lapse, are now being drawn noose-tight and houses of prostitution in the suburbs are being closed down. 
What's more, a young nobleman, Claudio, is being haled off to prison for moral offenses. He is engaged to Juliet, but the marriage had been delayed while the matter of a dowry was being negotiated and meanwhile Juliet has managed to get pregnant. 
The Duke's deputy, Angelo, a man of rigid and unassailable virtue (his very name means "angel"), is applying the law against unmarried intercourse to the extreme and Claudio will be slated for execution. 
Claudio, in this deep trouble, stops to talk to his friend Lucio and complains of being thus struck down by penalties: 


Which have, like unscoured armor, hung by th'wall

So long, that nineteen zodiacs have gone round

And none of them been wornÖ





óAct I, scene ii, lines 168-74 


The sun travels once around the zodiac in one year. Nineteen zodiacs are therefore nineteen years. 
Lucio advises Claudio to appeal to the Duke, but the Duke is not to be found. Claudio therefore asks Lucio to hasten to a nunnery where his (Claudio's) sister is about to take her vows. Perhaps she will plead with Angelo on his behalf and win him over. 


Ö to Poland




But the Duke has not really left after all. He wishes to observe affairs while remaining unobserved, see how the moral reform will work out, and so on. The Duke explains this to a monk, Friar Thomas, saying that even Angelo, his deputy, doesn't know the truth:


Ö he supposes me traveled to Poland;

For so I have strewed it in the common ear,





óAct I, scene iii, lines 13-15 


In Shakespeare's time Poland was much larger than it is today. It bordered on Austria (and what had once been Hungary) to the northeast, and included large sections of what is now the Soviet Union. It extended from the Baltic to the Black Sea and was almost at the peak of its territorial expansion. But the aristocracy in Poland, as in Hungary, was uncontrollable and kept the central government weak. 


Ö snow-brothÖ




Lucio reaches Isabella (Claudio's sister) at the nunnery. She has not yet made her final vows and she may speak to him. He tells her of Claudio's situation. Claudio cannot make amends by marrying the girl he has made pregnant because Angelo is intent on setting an example. Lucio has no great hopes that Angelo can be swerved from this, for the man is icily virtuous. Lucio describes Angelo as 


a man whose blood

Is very snow-brothÖ




óAct I, scene iv, lines 57-59 


The implication is that he cannot feel the stirrings of passion and cannot sympathize with those who do. Under the lash of virtue he would insist upon a rigid justice that would be as cruel as anything vice would demand. 
Yet, as a last resort, Lucio urges Isabella to go to Angelo and plead with him. He might be softened by a girl's request. 
The chances of success are sum, however, for in the next scene Angelo is shown in conversation with Escalus and he insists on the letter of the law firmly. Strict justice and nothing but justice is what he demands, and he gives orders that Claudio be executed the next morning at 9 a.m. 


Ö at Hallowmas. ..




The gravity of the developing situation with respect to Claudio is lightened by a scene in which a comic constable, Elbow, has arrested Pompey, who works as servant in a brothel, and Froth, who has been a customer there. Both are brought before Angelo and Escalus for judgment. 
When Pompey begins to testify, however, he does so with a long-windedness that weaves round and round the point without ever coming to it. It drags in even the exact time of the death of Froth's father. Pompey says: 


Was't not at Hallowmas, Master Froth?





óAct II, scene i, lines 123-24 


Froth answers with grave precision: 


All-hallond Eve.





óAct II, scene i, line 125 


"Hallowmas," which is also "All Hallows' Day," is a day set aside for the celebration of all the saints generally, known and unknown, and it is also known as "All Saints' Day." The celebration is on November 1, which happens, by no great coincidence, to be an important pastoral holiday of the ancient Celts. Many of the ancient customs of the earlier pagan holiday have come down to us, transfigured by Christian disapproval, and have given us a melange of witches and hobgoblins. 
The night, naturally, is the best time for the spirits of darkness, and since in ancient times (among the Jews, for instance) the twenty-four-hour day included the sunlit period plus the night before, rather than the night after, it was the night of October 31 that was witch time. This is the "All-hallond Eve" that Froth refers to, or "All Hallows' Eve" or "All Saints' Eve," or, as it is best known today, Halloween. 


Ö a night in Russia




Angelo, whose virtue leaves him no room for humor, leaves in disgust, allowing Escalus to render judgment, and saying: 


This will last out a night in Russia,

When nights are longest there.





óAct II, scene i, lines 133-34 


In Shakespeare's time Russia was just impinging on west European consciousness (see page I-154). At that time Russian territory had already reached the Arctic Ocean, and in 1553 an English trade mission under Richard Chancellor reached that nation through the one port that was open to the sea powers of the West-Archangel, on the Arctic shore. 
It was this which gave England the notion of Russia as an essentially Arctic nation; a notion that was never quite wiped out of European consciousness. There were parts of Russia that were farther south than any part of England, even in the sixteenth century, before still further expansion southward had taken place. What counted, though, was the latitude of Archangel, which is only a hundred miles south of the Arctic Circle. "When nights are longest there" (in December and January) they are over twenty-three-hours long-though much of that time is twilit 


Ö a shrewd Caesar Ö




The mild Escalus, left to deal with Pompey and Froth, lets them go but warns them nut to be picked up again, for he does not wish to see them before him once more. He says to Pompey: 


// / do, Pompey,

I shall beat you to your tent,

and prove a shrewd Caesar to you;





óAct II, scene i, lines 247-49 


The reference is, of course, to the Roman general Pompey and his defeat by Julius Caesar (see page I-257). 


As mercy does




Claudio's moment of execution is approaching, and now his sister, Isabella, comes to plead for his life. Yet she is as strictly virtuous as Angelo and has no great sympathy for her brother's sexual offense. She says (very Angelo-like): 


There is a vice that most I do abhor,

And most desire should meet the blow of justice,





óAct II, scene ii, lines 29-30 


Naturally, her cold plea doesn't touch Angelo and she is at once ready to give up. Lucio, however (who is the pattern of goodhearted vice throughout the play and makes a good contrast to the two examples of marble-hearted virtue), urges her to plead more passionately. 
Fired at last, Isabella turns to the only legitimate pleas that can turn aside justice: 


No ceremony that to great ones 'longs,

Not the king's crown, nor the deputed sword,

The marshal's truncheon, nor the judge's robe,

Become them with one half so good a grace

As mercy does.





óAct II, scene ii, lines 59-63


Thus is the conflict of the play set forth clearly: justice versus mercy. 
And as Isabella grows more eloquent, Angelo begins to thaw-but not out of mercy. He is attracted not so much by the reasoning as by the reasoner. He asks Isabella to return the next morning, and when he is left alone, he discovers to his surprise that he too has finally felt the stirrings of passion. 


Ö but to dieÖ




At the second meeting between Isabella and Angelo, Angelo is ready to offer the mercy that Isabella has begged, but only at the price of Isabella herself. It is now Isabella's turn to be unbendingly virtuous. She refuses the price even if that means her brother must die, doing so without hesitation, and marches off to inform her brother of that fact. 
Claudio is horrified at the news Isabella brings him and, at first impulse, agrees that it is better for himself to die than for his sister to lose her virtue. But then he begins to think about death and he quails, saying: 


Ay, but to die, and go we know not where,

To lie in cold obstruction and to rot,

This sensible warm motion to become

A kneaded clod; and the delighted spirit

To bathe in fiery floods, or to reside

In thrilling region of thick-ribbed ice;

To be imprisoned in the viewless winds,

And blown with restless violence round about

The pendant world; or to be worse than worst

Of those that lawless and incertain thought

Imagine howling-'tis too horrible!

The weariest and most loathed worldly life

That age, ache, penury, and imprisonment

Can lay on nature is a paradise

To what we fear of death.





óAct III, scene i, lines 118-32 


This sounds a great deal like the various descriptions of the sufferings of the damned in hell in Dante's Divine Comedy. 
So Claudio asks his sister to sacrifice her virtue for him. We might expect from Isabella the mercy she had requested so movingly of Angelo. She might not give in to Claudio, but she might at least sympathize with his fear of death and forgive him his human weakness. She does not. As rigid and extreme as Angelo (before lust intervened), Isabella shrieks out at her brother: 


Die, perish! Might but my bending down

Reprieve thee from thy fate, it should proceed.

I'll pray a thousand prayers for thy death,

No word to save thee.





óAct III, scene i, lines 144-47 


Ö Mariana, the sister of FrederickÖ




But the Duke, disguised as a friar, has overheard the colloquy between brother and sister in the jail, and now he begins to take countermeasures. He insists on speaking to Isabella before she leaves and says to her: 


Have you not heard speak of Mariana,

the sister of Frederick,

the great soldier who miscarried at sea?





óAct III, scene i, lines 212-14 


There is no indication that this reference to Frederick implies any real person. We might point out, though, that there were a number of Fredericks involved in German and Austrian history. One of them, Frederick I Barbarossa, was Holy Roman Emperor from 1152 to 1190 and he was indeed a great warrior, the strongest of the medieval emperors. In his old age, when almost seventy, he joined the Third Crusade (the one in which Richard the Lion-Heart was involved, see page II-219) and in Asia Minor drowned in a river while bathing. This is close to having "miscarried at sea." 
It turns out that this Mariana had been betrothed to Angelo, but when her brother was wrecked at sea, her dowry was lost and Angelo promptly and coldly broke the marriage contract (about par for his kind of virtue). 
The Duke now proposes the exact device used by Helena in All's Well That Ends Well, which Shakespeare had written a year or two earlier. Isabella is to pretend to accede to Angelo and to insist that he stay with her only briefly and in silence. It will then be arranged to have Mariana substitute for Isabella. Angelo will pardon Claudio as payment, then be forced to marry Mariana when the truth is revealed. 


Ö Pygmalion's images Ö




Pompey now comes onstage again. Once more he is arrested on the old charge of running a house of prostitution and this time there will be no mercy. When Lucio enters, Pompey recognizes an old customer and friend and asks for him to intercede. Lucio, however, is quite heartless and makes a mere joke of it, saying:


How now, noble Pompey!

What, at the wheels of Caesar?

Art thou led in triumph?

What, is there none of Pygmalion's images,

newly made woman, to be had now,

for putting the hand in the pocket and extracting it clutched?





óAct III, scene ii, lines 44-48 


Again there is the reference to Pompey and Caesar that, earlier, Escalus had used. Of course, Pompey was never led in triumph behind Caesar's chariot, for he died before that could be. And even if he had not died, it was not the custom of Roman generals to be awarded a triumph for their victories over other Roman generals. The metaphor is colorful, but inaccurate. 
Pygmalion is a mythical character, whose story is told in Ovid's Metamorphoses. He was a King of Cyprus who had carved a statue so beautiful that he fell in love with it. He prayed to Aphrodite to give him a wife resembling the statue and she did better. She had the statue come to life, and Pygmalion did indeed marry her. 
Lucio's reference to "newly made woman" plays on words bawdily, referring both to Pygmalion's come-to-life statue and to prostitutes who have just completed a turn. In the latter sense, they would have money that Pompey could make use of in order to bribe his way to freedom. 


Ö the Emperor of Russia




The Duke/Friar is also onstage and Lucio lingers to talk to him, not recognizing him as Duke, of course. Lucio quotes some rumors, saying of the Duke: 


Some say he is with the Emperor of Russia,




óAct III, scene ii, line 89 


In 1472 Ivan III, till then Grand Duke of Muscovy, married Sophia, niece of the last Byzantine Emperor. Ivan thereupon claimed the throne of the Empire (now defunct, actually) for himself and assumed the title of Tsar ("Caesar"). In Western Europe this title was translated into "Emperor," and Russia remained under a tsar-emperor for nearly four and a half centuries. 
Lucio, out of sheer high spirits and a mischievous desire to shock a holy man, goes on to repeat all sorts of slanders against the Duke. When the Friar makes plain his indignation over this, Lucio increases his slanders, accusing the Duke of unbridled lust, drunkenness, and ignorance. 


Ö come Philip and JacobÖ




Lucio goes off laughing, but he has tried to be funny at a very unfortunate time for himself. Mistress Overdone, the proprietress of a bawdy-house, is also being arrested, and she believes it was Lucio who bore witness against her. She therefore accuses Lucio, in turn, to Escalus. It seems that he has had a child by one of the prostitutes of her house. She says: 


Mistress Kate Keepdown was with child by him

in the Duke's time; he promised her marriage;

his child is a year and a quar ter old,

comePhilip and Jacob; I have kept it myselfÖ





óAct III, scene ii, lines 202-5 


St. Philip and St. James, two of the apostles, are together commemorated on May 1. The Hebrew name of James is Jacob. "Come Philip and Jacob" therefore means "next May 1." 


A Bohemian born Ö




The plot to deceive Angelo is completed. Mariana is introduced; it is explained to her what she must do and she agrees. 
But Angelo, once he has slept with Mariana (thinking she was Isabella), fears the discovery of the sin. If he pardons Claudio, everyone will be astonished and ready to believe something unusual has happened. If Isabella talks, her tale would be accepted. If, however, Claudio is executed, who would then believe Isabella's story? 
Therefore, even as the Duke/Friar waits for notice of Claudio's reprieve, a letter to the Provost (the keeper of the prison) arrives from Angelo, ordering the execution of Claudio and, in addition, of someone named Barnardine. 
The Duke/Friar asks who Barnardine is and the Provost replies: 


A Bohemian born,

but here nursed up and bred;





óAct IV, scene ii, lines 133-34 


Bohemia (now part of modern Czechoslovakia) is the westernmost Slavic region of Europe. The fourteenth century was its golden age and its King, Charles I, was Holy Roman Emperor from 1347 to 1378. Bohemia declined after that, chiefly through internal religious strife. 
After 1462 Bohemia was ruled by Hungary, and when the latter country was defeated by the Turks, Bohemia was taken over by the Austrian House of Habsburg. Bohemia remained Austrian through Shakespeare's life and for three centuries afterward. 


Ö pluck out his eyes




Barnardine, it seems, has been in prison for nine years for murder and now, all reprieves having been exhausted and his crime thoroughly proved, is ready for death. The Duke/Friar considers having his head sent to Angelo in place of Claudio's. It turns out, though, that a prisoner has died that morning of fever and he happens to resemble Claudio. It is that head which will be sent to Angelo, and Barnardine as well as Claudio will remain unexecuted. 
Yet when Isabella comes to receive her reprieved brother, the Duke/ Friar tells her that her brother has been executed. Her instant cry is for revenge as she shrieks: 


O, I will to him and pluck out his eyes!





óAct IV, scene iii, line 121 


Some critics are appalled at the Duke's needless cruelty in hiding from Isabella the fact that her brother has been saved. The Duke's action seems reasonable to me, however. He was present when Isabella cruelly turned on her death-fearing brother and excoriated him, saying she would pray for his death. Well, now she had what she prayed for. That might teach her a little something about justice and mercy and she would later have an opportunity to learn a little more. (Besides, one is entitled to wonder whether she is more outraged at the death of her brother or at the fact that her sacrificed virtue-which Angelo thought he had-was so little valued by him.) 


"Ö death for death"




Now begins a charade arranged by the Duke. He returns to Vienna in his own guise and is so greeted. Isabella (following the instructions of the Friar, not knowing him to be the Duke) accuses Angelo of having insisted on her body as the price of her brother and then having had the brother executed anyway. Angelo denies everything and the Duke affects to believe him and orders Isabella punished. 
Mariana joins in the accusation against Angelo and the whole story comes out, but still Angelo denies and still the Duke refuses to accept the accusation. 
It turns out that a Friar has urged the women to make the accusation and the question turns to him. Lucio, out of sheer love of mischief, accuses the Friar of having slandered the Duke, putting his own words into the Friar's mouth. 
The Duke retires, returns as Friar, and he too is ordered arrested. Lucio abuses him quite gratuitously and pulls off the Friar's hood. All freeze in astonishment as the Duke's face is revealed. 
And now the Duke speaks in earnest for the first time since his return. It is his task to represent mercy and his first words are to pardon Escalus the harsh words he addressed to the Friar, not knowing that behind the cowl was the Duke. 
Angelo has no choice now but to confess his guilt and ask for death. The Duke, however, is in no hurry for that. First there is a kind justice (not a cruel one) to be done Mariana. She must be given the social status that goes with marriage. Angelo and Mariana are therefore taken offstage to be married. 
Isabella asks forgiveness for having, unknowingly, treated the Duke as less than a Duke and she receives pardon freely. 
And then Angelo, returning as a married man, must hear sentence passed against him. The Duke offers him his own kind of justice and suggests that mercy itself would demand merciless justice, and would cry out: 


"An Angelo for Claudio, death for death!"

Haste still [always] pays haste, and leisure answers leisure;

Like doth quit like, and Measure still for Measure.





óAct V, scene i, lines 412-14 


It is the cry of rigid return of damage for damage and is usually recognized as among the primitive ethics of early religious development. It reminds one of the passage in the Old Testament which says: "And if a man cause a blemish in his neighbour; as he hath done, so shall it be done to him; Breach for breach, eye for eye, tooth for tooth" (Leviticus 24:19-20). In a way, of course, this was an attempt at limitation of revenge. If one man knocked out another's tooth, revenge must not take the form of killing, but satisfy itself with no more than knocking out a tooth in return. Nevertheless, the doctrine of "eye for eye, tooth for tooth" sounds barbaric to those who make no such fetish of exact justice. 
It is usually thought that the Old Testament doctrine quoted above was repudiated by the New Testament, for Jesus says in the Sermon on the Mount: "Ye have heard that it hath been said, An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth: But I say unto you, That ye resist not evil" (Matthew 5:38-39). 
But then later in the same sermon, Jesus says: "Judge not, that ye be not judged. For with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged; and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again" (Matthew 7:1-2).
This latter passage may refer to divine judgment, but it can be applied to human judgments; and whether divine or human, it is eye for eye and tooth for tooth all over again. 
It is the New Testament passage which the play counters, for it is the New Testament passage that gives the play its title. 


Let Mm not die




Mariana pleads for Angelo's life, but he is her husband and she loves him. It is easy for her to want mercy for the man. What about Isabella? 
To Isabella, Angelo is nothing but a villain. He tried to rob her of both her virginity and her brother, and as far as she knows, the brother is indeed lost. She has no reason to want mercy, every reason to want revenge. Mariana pleads with her and slowly Isabella kneels. She says to the Duke: 


/ partly think

A due sincerity governed his deeds,

Till he did look on me.

Since it is so, Let him not die,





óAct V, scene i, lines 448-51 


That is why it was necessary for the Duke not to reveal to Isabella that her brother lived. She had to forgive Angelo at the worst. She had to learn mercy at last. 
Angelo is therefore pardoned and for this many critics (as savage as Angelo) condemn the play, because they want to see the man hanged. Yet is it only for those with whom we sympathize that mercy is to be sought? If that is so, then what credit is there in mercy and why should we have expected Shylock to show mercy for an Antonio with whom he did not sympathize, or for Angelo to show mercy for a Claudio with whom he did not sympathize? It is precisely to those whom we hate that we must show mercy if the word is to have meaning at all. 


Thy slanders I forgive Ö




But the Duke has one more person to teach-himself. After pardons are granted all round, even to the wicked murderer, Barnardine, the Duke finds there is one person he cannot pardon-the one who has sinned directly against himself. This is Lucio, who has slandered him. 
The Duke orders Lucio to marry the prostitute on whom he has fathered a child and, afterward, to be whipped and hanged. 
Lucio seems to be more dismayed at the disgrace of the marriage than at the rest and manages to be witty even at this last moment. Whereupon the Duke, with an effort, manages to be merciful on his own account too. He says: 


Upon mine honor, thou shalt marry her.

Thy slanders I forgive; and therewithal

Remit thy other forfeits.





óAct V, scene i, lines 521-23 


Then, in his last speech, the Duke indicates pretty clearly that he intends to marry Isabella, and thus ends the play. 








25. The Tempest


Although The Tempest is usually found first in editions presenting the collected works of Shakespeare, it is actually the last play to be written entirely by Shakespeare, its date being 1611. His only work afterward consisted of his contributions to Fletcher's plays Henry VIII (see page II-743) and The Two Noble Kinsmen (see page I-53). 
In a way, it is pleasing that Shakespeare ended with The Tempest, for this marks a return to his sunny comedies written over a decade earlier. We may be glad that the great man ended his career on an upbeat. 
What's more, The Tempest is Shakespeare's complete creation too, for it is one play in which he apparently made up his own plot. 


Good boatswainÖ




The play opens with a ship struggling against a tempest. On board are a group of Italian noblemen, for here, as in so many of his other romances, Shakespeare uses Italy as the home of romance. 
The crew is desperately trying to save the ship when the Italian aristocrats emerge from below. One speaks, saying: 


Good boatswain, have care.

Where's the master? Play the men.




óAct I, scene i, lines 9-10 


The speaker is Alonso, King of Naples, and with him on the ship is his brother, Sebastian, and his son, Ferdinand. The kingdom of Naples was from about 1100 down to 1860 the political unit making up the southern half of the Italian peninsula, with Sicily usually (but not always) included. Its capital was the city of Naples. 
Alonso is not a typically Italian name. It is a Spanish one, a variant of Alfonso. Both Sebastian and Ferdinand are names best known in history as belonging to Spanish and Portuguese monarchs, rather than to Italians. This is not surprising, for Naples in Shakespeare's time was closely connected with Spain.
In 1420 Naples was under the rule of the aging Queen Joanna II, who had no heirs and who feared that the French would seize her kingdom. Nearby Sicily was under the rule of Alfonso V of Aragon (see page I-545) and she made him heir to her rule. She changed her mind afterward, but Alfonso V had no mind to retire. After she died in 1435, he began a long struggle to fix himself on the Neapolitan throne. By 1443 he had succeeded and made Naples the capital of his entire dominion, including Aragon itself. He reigned as Alfonso I of Naples. 
Aragon continued to rule Naples until 1479, when Aragon and Castile formed a dynastic union that gave rise to modern Spain. The united Spanish kingdom continued to rule Naples through Shakespeare's time and beyond. At the time The Tempest was written, Naples was ruled by a viceroy serving the Spanish King, Philip IIIÖ 
In thinking of Naples, then, Shakespeare automatically thinks Spanish even when he treats it as an independent kingdom. (In Othello, such characters as Roderigo and Iago have Spanish names even though they are supposedly Venetians.) 


Ö the Duke of MilanÖ




Despite the royalty on board, the ship is apparently sinking and must be abandoned. 
The events do not go unobserved, however. There is an island nearby -not one that can be pinned down on a map-but one that exists only in this tale. All we can say is that it ought to be located somewhere between Italy and the African shore. 
Two individuals are all the truly human inhabitants the island of the play has: a man, Prospero, and his daughter, Miranda. 
The daughter is terribly perturbed over the ship, which is being destroyed in the tempest, but Prospero calms her and assures her that no harm will be done. He says it is now time, at last, to tell her of their past and how they came to be on the island. 


Twelve year since, Miranda, twelve year since,

Thy father was the Duke of Milan and

A prince of power.




óAct I, scene ii, lines 53-55 


Milan is a duchy in northern Italy (see page I-447). 


Ö rapt in secret studies




Prospero, as Duke, had little interest in governing and left the actual conduct of affairs to his brother, Antonio, while he himself was concerned with scholarship: 


The government I cast upon my brother

And to my state grew stranger, being transported

And rapt in secret studies.




óAct I, scene ii, lines 75-77 


In the Middle Ages there were two kinds of studies: that of theology and related philosophy, which was considered the highest goal of reason; and that of the secular knowledge of the world. 
The latter was suspect for a number of reasons. It had its roots in the pagan learning of the Greeks, for one thing. For another, the secular scholars (notably the alchemists) actually cultivated an air of mysticism that reinforced vague beliefs that they consorted with spirits and practiced magic. Naturally, the general public would fear such scholars and suspect that there was much more to their work than they could possibly admit. 
And indeed, it becomes clear that Prospero's "secret studies" did indeed involve magic, that he could command spirits and control portions of the universe. 


This King of Naples. ..




Prospero's preoccupation with his books and studies allowed his brother, Antonio, to intrigue for the throne. Antonio came to an understanding with Alonso of Naples (the same who was on the ship caught in the tempest). 
Prospero says: 


This King of Naples, being an enemy






To me inveterate, hearkens to my brother's suit;




óAct I, scene ii, lines 121-22 


The King of Naples therefore sent an army to Milan. Antonio treacherously opened the city gates so that Milan was taken and then ruled as new Duke, but tributary to Naples. 
Though The Tempest is fictional throughout, there is an echo of history here. In 1535 the last native Duke of Milan, Francesco Maria Sforza, died without heirs. The duchy was taken over by Emperor Charles V (see page II-747), who in 1540 gave it to his son, who was later to be Philip II of Spain. Milan remained Spanish throughout Shakespeare's life and for nearly a century beyond. And since Naples had been Spanish before that, it is almost as though Naples had taken Milan. 
As it happens, Antonio, the usurper, is also on the sinking ship, along with the King of Naples. 


Ö a cherubin




Once the coup d'etat had been effected, Prospero and Miranda were taken away, placed on a small ship, and set afloat on the Mediterranean. Fortunately, a sympathetic Neapolitan lord, Gonzalo, made it possible for them to survive the ordeal by secretly giving them clothing and other necessaries and, most of all, a number of the most valuable books from Prospero's library. And, as it happens, Gonzalo is also on the ship. 
Miranda is affected by the tale but, in her gentle sympathy, does not think of her own danger then but only of the added trouble she must have been to her father. He denies that she was any trouble. Rather the reverse, for she was 


O, a cherubin

Thou wast that did preserve me!





óAct I, scene ii, lines 152-53 


A cherub is a creature mentioned in the Bible. From the wording in some places, it would seem to represent the storm blast. Thus, in Psalms 18:10 it is written: "And he [the Lord] rode upon a cherub and did fly: yea, he did fly upon the wings of the wind." 
The cherub is nowhere described in the Bible except for the indication that it had wings. It may have been represented as a fearsome creature along the lines of the eagle-winged, man-headed bulls that were so characteristic a feature of Assyrian sculpture. 
Whatever its origins, however, the cherub came to be considered as an infant angel and took the place in Christian art of the cupids of pagan art. It is in the sense of infant angel that Shakespeare uses the word here. 
Incidentally, the Hebrew plural is, characteristically, indicated by an "-im" suffix, so that one can speak of one cherub, but two cherubim. Such a plural is utterly foreign to English, of course, and the tendency is to consider cherubim (or cherubin) as a singular and then speak of cheru-bims or cherubins if the plural is needed. Shakespeare uses such a false singular here.


Ö my Ariel.. .




Having completed his tale, Prospero makes Miranda sleep by his magical art and proceeds about the more serious business of the day. He calls to him the chief spirit at his command: 


Come away [here], servant, come! I am ready now.

Approach, my Ariel! Come!





óAct I, scene ii, lines 187-88 


Ariel is a spirit of the air, wild and free, and untainted by any form of earthiness or earth-bound humanity. 
The name has a biblical sound. In Isaiah 29:1 the prophet says: "Woe to Ariel, to Ariel, the city where David dwelt!" The word means "lion of God" or possibly "hearth of God" and is meant as a poetic synonym for Jerusalem. 
Yet it sounds like the name of a spirit or angel, since all the angelic names in the Bible and the Apocrypha end in the suffix "-el" (God), as Gabriel, Rafael, Azrael, and Uriel. The first part of the name, "Ari-" sounds like "airy," which makes it fitting for an airy spirit. 
The name Ariel is also to be found in the heavens through a queer concatenation of events. 
In 1787 the German-English astronomer William Herschel discovered two satellites of the planet Uranus (which he had discovered a few years earlier) and broke with the long-established custom of naming bodies of the solar system after Greek and Roman deities. Instead, he called them Titania and Oberon (see page I-28). 
In 1851 the English astronomer William Lassell discovered two more satellites, closer to the planet, and went along with the spirit names. He called the new satellites Ariel and Umbriel. 
These two spirits are from the poem The Rape of the Lock by the English poet Alexander Pope, published in 1712. In the poem, Ariel is the name given to a sylph who guards Belinda, the heroine. (It seems quite reasonable to suppose that Pope borrowed the name from Shakespeare.) Umbriel, on the other hand, is a melancholy spirit, always sighing and weeping, with a name suggested by the fact that umbra is Latin for "shadow." Umbriel is always in the shadows and the name occurs nowhere else in literature. 
Nevertheless, so much better known is The Tempest than The Rape of the Lock that the satellite Ariel is much more likely to be associated with the former than with the latter. 
Thus, in 1948, when the Dutch-American astronomer Gerard P. Kuiper discovered a fifth satellite of Uranus, closer (and smaller) than any of the others, he automatically allowed Ariel to suggest another name from The Tempest and the new satellite he named "Miranda." 


I flamed amazementÖ




When Ariel arrives, it appears that the tempest is no true tempest but an appearance raised by magical arts, designed to frighten the men on the ship and set the stage for Prospero's plan to set all things to rights. Ariel explains how he carried out his task of creating panic: 


Now on the beak,

Now in the waist, the deck, in every cabin,

I flamed amazement.

Sometime I'd divide

And burn in many places;




óAct I, scene ii, lines 196-99 


Ariel was, in other words, converting himself into "St. Elmo's fire." This is the glow produced on dark, stormy nights by gathering static electricity, which is discharged from pointed objects. Such a discharge, if vigorous enough, will produce a glow. 
It will appear on the points of masts or spars, for instance. If one glow is seen it is called "Helena" (in reference to Helen of Troy) and if it divides in two it is "Castor and Pollux" (the twin brothers of Helen). 
There is no St. Elmo. The name is thought to be a corruption of "St. Erasmus," the patron saint of Mediterranean sailors. The glow was thought to be the visible sign of the saint guarding them during the storm. 


Ö the still-vexed Bermoothes Ö




Ariel carefully explains that no one has been hurt, although they have been separated: the King's son brought to shore alone; the other royalty brought to another place; the ship itself taken safe to harbor; and the rest of the fleet sent sadly on its way thinking they had seen the flagship, with the King on board, wrecked. 
Ariel describes the place where he has bestowed the ship, saying: 


Safely in harbor

Is the King's ship; in the deep nook where once

Thou call'dst me up at midnight to fetch dew

From the still-vexed [always stormy] Bermoothes Ö




óAct I, scene ii, lines 226-29 


The Bermoothes are the Bermudas, a group of small islands which, all together, are no larger than Manhattan. They had come dramatically into the news shortly before The Tempest was written. 
In 1607 the English had made their first permanent settlement in what is now the United States, at Jamestown in Virginia. The settlement barely managed to survive its first few years and it required periodic infusions of new colonists and supplies from England to keep going. In 1609 a fleet of nine ships sailed westward to supply Jamestown. 
A storm hit them off the Bermudas and the flagship, carrying the admiral and the new governor of Virginia, was separated from the rest. The remaining eight ships made it to Jamestown; the flagship did not and was given up for lost. 
Apparently, though, it had managed to come ashore in the Bermudas and there its passengers and crew managed to eke a living until they could build two small boats that carried them west across the six hundred miles that separated them from the mainland. They showed up in Jamestown nearly a year after the storm and it was as though they had come back from the dead. 
It was a sensation and the tale of the adventure filled England to the point where Shakespeare calls the islands "still-vexed" because of the association with the storm that wrecked the flagship, though the.Bermudas are not more stormy than other places. The description of the Bermudas by those who were stranded there so long was most favorable and Prospero's magic island seems modeled on the reports of Bermuda (which has remained British territory ever since). 
In fact, there seems no question but that the tale of this shipwreck inspired Shakespeare to write The Tempest. There is a storm that separates the flagship from the fleet. Men are lost and yet not lost but are saved in almost miraculous fashion after spending time on an almost magical island. All Shakespeare had to do was add an Italian-style romance. 


The foul witch Sycorax.. .




Pleased with himself, Ariel reminds Prospero that the long term of service he has rendered draws to a close and that he has been promised his freedom. Prospero, who is working out his climactic scheme, and needs only another day, is irritated, and reminds Ariel from what misery he had been rescued. 
Prospero says: 


Hast thou forgot

The foul witch Sycorax, who with age and envy

Was grown into a hoop?





óAct I, scene ii, lines 257-59 


The name is an invention of Shakespeare's, though it may have arisen out of the combination of Greek words for "pig" and "crow." Prospero asks Ariel where Sycorax was born and the spirit answers: 


Sir, in Argier.





óAct I, scene ii, line 260 


Argier is a distorted version of Algiers, a city on the southern shore of the Mediterranean, 650 miles southwest of Naples. It had been founded in 950 as a Moslem town and has remained Moslem ever since. To the Christians of Europe, a Moslem town would seem like a natural birthplace for a witch. 
Algiers had, besides, made the news in the sixteenth century. In 1545 Emperor Charles V had sent a fleet to Algiers, hoping to capture it. That fleet had been dispersed by a storm and the attempt ended in disaster. It was easy for good Christians to suppose that the diabolical Moslems had raised the storm by means of witchcraft and so it would seem natural to associate Sycorax with that city. 
Sycorax was so evil a witch, however, as to have been banished even from Algiers. She was taken to the island that later became Prospero's and was left there. 
She was a powerful witch and when Ariel would not obey her wicked commands, she imprisoned the spirit in a pine tree for twelve years. She died in that interval and Ariel might have remained imprisoned forever, had not Prospero arrived and freed him. It was in gratitude for this that Ariel was serving Prospero. 


Ö Caliban her son




When Sycorax died, however, she left something behind. She had been pregnant when brought to the island and had borne a child upon it whom Prospero describes as 


A freckled whelp, hagborn, not honored with

A human shape.





óAct I, scene ii, lines 283-84 


Ariel answers: 


Yes, Caliban her son.





óAct I, scene ii, line 284 


This Caliban, the offspring of a witch and, presumably, one of the devils that served her, is a semihuman monster, earthy, dull, and savage. The name has entered the language to mean any brutal and debased person. The name is Shakespeare's invention but it may be guessed that it was suggested by "cannibal," a word which had been made prominent by explorations of the New World (see page I-617). 


Ö my dam's god, Setebos




Caliban is called forth to do some labor and appears, railing and cursing, misshapen and monstrous. He complains that it was his island before Prospero came and that now he has been enslaved, but Prospero insists that they had tried to treat him with humanity and kindness and that in response he had tried to rape Miranda. 
Caliban, however he may wish to rebel, must do as he is told. He says: 


/ must obey. His art is of such pow'r

It would control my dam's god, Setebos,

And make a vassal of him.





óAct I, scene ii, lines 372-74 


Setebos was a god worshiped by the Patagonians of southern South America. He was first mentioned by Ferdinand Magellan, whose expedition in 1519-22 was the first to circumnavigate the world. Setebos then appeared in English in a book called History of Travel by Robert Eden, published in 1577. Apparently Shakespeare saw it there and thus another aspect of the New World entered the play. 


Ö the King of Tunis




Prospero's plans continue to progress. Ariel leads Ferdinand, the young son of the King of Naples, to the cell. Ferdinand is in deep grief for his father, who, he is certain, is dead. Nevertheless, upon first sight of Miranda he falls head over heels in love. For her part, Miranda, who never saw a young man before, is equally smitten. Prospero is delighted, but, to test the youth, pretends anger and keeps them apart. 
On another part of the island, the rest of the party is sunk in grief over the loss of Ferdinand. (These multiple griefs are part of the revenge Prospero is taking.) Gonzalo, the kindhearted old lord, is desperately trying to cheer up the King with cheerful conversation. They have their lives, he points out, and the island seems fruitful and comfortable. Besides, there are other blessings to be counted, for he says:


Methinks our garments are now as fresh

as when we put them on first in Afric,

at the marriage of the King's fair daughter

Claribel to the King of Tunis.





óAct II, scene i, lines 71-74 


This tells us what the trip was all about. A royal party has crossed the Mediterranean from Naples to Tunis and it was on the return voyage that the tempest brought them to this island. 
Tunis is at the point where Africa approaches most closely to Italy. It is. only 90 miles west of Sicily and but 350 miles southwest of Naples. 
From the eighth century on, Tunis and the country surrounding it had been Moslem, and this area is still Moslem today. It seems unlikely that Shakespeare would be describing the marriage of a Christian princess to a Moslem king. 
But then, in 1535, the Holy Roman Emperor, Charles V, had sent a naval expedition against Tunis (as ten years later he was to send one against Algiers). This earlier expedition had been successful and Tunis was taken with great slaughter. It was not a permanent conquest and did not in the least affect the Moslem character of the city, but it made a great stir and, presumably, Tunis emerged out of the shadows as the result of that victorious impingement of Christendom upon it. 


Ö of Carthage. ..




The mention of Claribel causes everyone to praise her and to say that Tunis had never had so fair a queen. But Gonzalo brings up Dido (see page I-20) as a possible competitor. Adrian (one of the courtiers present) objects and says: 


She [Dido] was of Carthage, not of Tunis.





óAct II, scene i, line 85 


To which Gonzalo replies with equanimity: 


This Tunis, sir, was Carthage.





óAct II, scene i, line 86 


This statement is almost true. 
Carthage was originally a Phoenician colony which had been utterly destroyed (after three wars) by Rome in 146 b.c. A new city was founded on the same site in 44 b.c. at the orders of Julius Caesar and was given the same name. The new Roman city was settled by Romans and Romanized Africans, however, and had nothing in common with the older Phoenician colony but the name and the site. 
Roman Carthage flourished until 698, when it was finally taken by the Arabs. With that, it died a second time and this time forever, but Tunis, a dozen miles westward along the seashore, became great in its place. Tunis is near the site of Carthage, but, strictly speaking, it is wrong to say, as Gonzalo does, that it is Carthage. In fact, Tunis (then called "Tunes") existed as a distinct and separate town when Roman Carthage was at its height. 


Ö the miraculous harp




Antonio, the usurping King of Naples, comments on the fact that Gonzalo has, in a moment, re-created the vanished city of Carthage. He says: 


His word is more than the miraculous harp.





óAct II, scene i, lines 89-90 


This is a reference to the Greek myth of Amphion and Zethus, twin brothers, whose father had been ruler of Thebes but had been deposed and killed by a younger brother. (Odd that Antonio should make such a reference.) Amphion and Zethus captured Thebes from their usurping uncle and wished to fortify it against a counterattack. They therefore built a stone wall around the city. Zethus carried the stones and piled them near the wall while Amphion, playing a magic lyre (or harp), made the pile of stones move of their own accord into the wall. 
The conversation continues until Ariel enters and causes all but Sebastian and Antonio to fall asleep. 
Antonio, the wicked usurping brother of Prospero, takes the opportunity to urge Sebastian to kill his brother and become King of Naples in his place. Sebastian allows himself to be tempted, but when they draw their swords to kill the King, Ariel wakes all the sleepers and Sebastian and Antonio must pretend they had heard wild beasts and had drawn their swords for that reason. (Thwarted ambition is presumably another part of Prospero's revenge.) 


Ö this mooncalf Ö




Meanwhile another pair of individuals are to be found wandering on the island. Trinculo, the King's jester, has escaped and is wandering aimlessly. So has Stephano, the King's butler. 
Caliban sees Trinculo approaching and, in terrible fright, pretends he is dead. Trinculo finds him, doesn't know what to make of the half-human monster, but crawls under his garment to stay out of the last dregs of the tempest. 
Stephano, who has salvaged some bottles of liquor, is carrying one and is 'drunk. He comes across the Caliban-Trinculo combination and views it as a monster with four legs and two voices. When Trinculo calls his name, Stephano is terrified and says: 


Ö This is a devil, and no monster.

I will leave him; I have no long spoon.





óAct II, scene ii, lines 102-3 


Stephano refers to the proverb which is usually quoted, now, as "Who sups with the devil must needs have a long spoon." 
But Trinculo identifies himself before Stephano is out of earshot. Stephano returns, pulls Trinculo out from under Caliban's garment, and says: 


Thou art very Trinculo indeed!

How cam'st thou to be the siege [excrement]

of this mooncalf? Can he vent Trinculos?





óAct II, scene ii, lines 110-12 


A mooncalf is the name given to the occasional deformed calf born of a cow, because this was thought to be due to the malign influence of the moon (see page I-629). Eventually, the expression came to be used for any monstrous form of life. 
Stephano gives Caliban a drink and the grateful Caliban (who has never tasted liquor before) wishes to worship Stephano as a god, and suggests to him that he kill Prospero and become king of the island, making Miranda his queen. Stephano thinks this is a good idea and all three troop off on this errand. There is obviously no danger, though, for Ariel is (invisibly) on guard. 


Ö the phoenix' throne. ..




Prospero, meanwhile, has put Ferdinand to work moving logs, and though the young prince is engaged in a demeaning manual labor, he loves it because it gives him a chance to be near Miranda. And Miranda, when she enters, cannot bear to see him working, and tries to carry the logs for him. The love grows with every second and Prospero, overhearing, is happy indeed. 
The situation is not quite so pleasant for the King and his party. Gon-zalo is half dead with walking; and Sebastian and Antonio are still plotting the assassination. Suddenly, though, a banquet is set before them through Prospero's magic. 
They are astonished, and Sebastian says, in stupefaction: 


Now I will believe

That there are unicorns; that in Arabia

There is one tree, the phoenix' throne; one phoenix

At this hour reigning there.





óAct III, scene iii, lines 21-24 


Sebastian compares the incredible sight they have seen with two other incredibles: the unicorn and the phoenix. 
The unicorn is generally pictured as a horselike creature with a single spiral horn on its forehead. Belief in this creature originated from three sources. 
First, the Bible speaks of unicorns. This, however, is a mistranslation of the Hebrew re'em, which is the aurochs or wild ox. The Assyrians showed these in bas-relief in profile so that only one horn showed. In the Greek translation of the Bible, re'em therefore became monokeros (one-horn) and in Latin unicornis (one-horn). 
Second, there were dim tales of actual creatures with a single hornlike structure. These were the rhinoceroses, rumors of which reached Europe from India (the earliest report on record being contained in the writings of the Greek physician Ctesias about 400 b.c.). 
Finally, there was the narwhal, a species of whale in which a single tooth (not a horn) formed a long, tapering spiral. These were brought back by sailors and called horns of unicorns, for as such they could be sold for fabulous sums for their supposed efficacy against poisoning. The effect of this was to make the horn of the unicorn appear in illustrations as though it was a transplanted narwhal tusk. 
The phoenix is more fabulous still and had its origins, perhaps, as an Egyptian solar myth. The Egyptians used a calendar in which the year was considered to be exactly 365 days long (instead of 365 1/4). The extra quarter-day was ignored and the individual days crept ahead of the seasons from year to year, therefore, until they had made a complete circuit in 1461 Egyptian years (or 1460 actual years). In other words, if a particular star were directly overhead at midnight on New Year's Day, it would not be overhead at midnight on New Year's Day for 1461 more years. This length of time was called the Sothic cycle because the Egyptians used Sirius as their reference star and in their language this star was called Sothis. 
Perhaps this 1461-year cycle of the sun versus the Egyptian calendar was mythologized into a long-lived flaming bird which, after 1461 years, died and gave rise to a new bird like itself. 
If so, the Greeks, who used a Babylonian calendar and not an Egyptian one and who therefore knew nothing of the Sothic cycle, altered the length of time to a rounder number-500 years is often mentioned. The bird is called the phoenix (from a word meaning "red-purple," as a hang-over perhaps from the Egyptian notion of a flaming sunlike bird). 
There were all sorts of accretions to the myth-the nature of the flaming pyre in which the bird consumes itself, the details of the birth of the new bird, and so on. The place where the death and rebirth takes place also varies; some place the site, significantly enough, at Heliopolis, the Egyptian city at which the sun god was worshiped. Others place it in Arabia or India (on the basis that the farther east, the more wonderful). 
There is only one phoenix at a time (as there is only one sun), and it seemed reasonable to suppose that if the phoenix immolated itself on a palm tree, it would be a palm tree as unique as itself. The Arabian desert is barren, so one can imagine it containing a single tree, the one on which the phoenix dies and is reborn. 


Ö the figure of this harpyÖ




Before the bemused and grateful travelers can eat, Ariel appears in horrible shape and the feast is taken away. Ariel denounces the malefactors for their treatment of Prospero. (The frustration of desire is another punishment and Alonso begins to feel remorse at his treatment of Prospero and to fear that the loss of his son is punishment therefore.) Prospero is pleased with Ariel's action and says: 


Bravely the figure of this harpy hast thou

Performed, my ArielÖ





óAct III, scene iii, lines 83-84 


The Harpies were originally spirits personifying the storm winds-rather like the cherubs. The Greeks finally personified them as hag-headed birds, with long talons and horrible screeches. Sometimes they were described as carrying off individuals. 
The most famous myth concerning them, however, involves Phineus, a soothsayer in eastern Thrace who incurred the anger of the gods. He was bunded and condemned to eternal hunger, for whenever food was placed on the table, Harpies would descend shrieking, snatching away some and fouling the rest. The Harpies were driven away at last by Jason and his men (see page I-505). 
The fame of the myth fixed this particular picture of the Harpy and made it appropriate for Ariel to assume the guise of one when the feast was snatched away from the Neapolitan King and his followers.


Ceres, most bounteous lady. ..




But Ferdinand's ordeal is over. Prospero is satisfied with him and tells him that he may marry his daughter. To make up for the pain caused him, Prospero puts on a spirit show for the happy couple. The classical goddesses are brought down to bless them. 
Iris comes in first, calling on another: 


Ceres, most bounteous lady, thy rich leas

Of wheat, rye, barley, fetches, oats, and peas;





óAct IV, scene i, lines 60-61 


Ceres (the Roman version of the Greek goddess Demeter) is the personification of the cultivated and fruitful soil, and all the food it produces. (We get our word "cereal" from her name.) She is naturally one whose blessing will ensure a fruitful marriage. After having enumerated Ceres' products, Iris says: 


óthe queen o'th'sky,

Whose wat'ry arch and messenger am I,

Bids thee leave these, and with her sovereign grace,

Here on this grass plot, in this very place,

To come and sport; her peacocks fly amain.





óAct IV, scene i, lines 70-74 


The "queen o'th'sky" would be Juno, of course (the Greek Hera), who is that because she is the wife of Jupiter (Zeus). Juno was considered by the Romans to have marriage and motherhood as her prime concern; she was the idealized wife. It was her place, therefore, to preside over the festivities on this occasion. The peacock was considered particularly sacred to her and these birds were supposed to draw her chariot. 
Iris is the personification of the rainbow. Since the rainbow, though clearly in the heavens, seems to arch down to earth, it is easy to imagine it as a bridge linking heaven and earth, and one along which a messenger can travel. The bridge and the messenger become one and Iris is pictured here as serving Juno, in particular. The "wat'ry arch" is, of course, the rainbow, which appears after a rain, when the air is full of water droplets. 
The rainbow attribute of Iris is indicated by Ceres' first words when she enters: 


Hail, many-colored messenger. ..





óAct IV, scene i, line 76 


Ö dusky DisÖ




Ceres has one reservation about attending the festivities. She says to Iris: 


Tell me, heavenly bow,

If Venus or her son, as thou dost know,

Do now attend the Queen? Since they did plot

The means that dusky Dis my daughter got,

Her and her blind boy's scandaled company

I have forsworn.





óAct IV, scene i, lines 86-91 


Dis is one of the Roman equivalents of the Greek god of the underworld, Pluto. Pluto seized Persephone, the daughter of Demeter (Ceres), and took her to the underworld to be his queen. Demeter located her only after a weary search and even then could only arrange to have her returned for part of each year. It is only in that part that Demeter allows the earth to bear crops; while Persephone is underground the earth lies blasted and cold. (This is an obvious way of mythologizing the cycle of summer and whiter, see page I-5.) 
Pluto would not have fallen in love with Persephone had he not been wounded by the arrows of blind Eros (Cupid), the son of Aphrodite (Venus), which is why Ceres holds her grudge. 


Ö towards Paphos.. .




Actually, Venus and her son have no place at the celebration. They are the personification of erotic love and Prospero has made it plain that Miranda is to remain a virgin until the marriage rites are fully performed. Iris says, therefore, of Venus: 


/ met her Deity

Cutting the clouds towards Paphos, and her son

Dove-drawn with her.





óAct IV, scene i, lines 92-94 


Paphos (see page I-15) was a city where Venus (Aphrodite) was particularly venerated.


Ö they may prosperous be




Juno now enters and says to Ceres: 


Go with me

To bless this twain, that they may prosperous be

And honored in their issue.





óAct IV, scene i, lines 103-5 


This "wedding masque," which occupies so much of the play, may have been deliberately inserted to apply to a real wedding at which The Tempest was to be shown; or else, since the wedding masque was there, the play was thought particularly appropriate for such a celebration. 
At any rate, The Tempest seems to have had one of its early productions in the winter of 1612-13 as part of the festive preparations for the marriage of Elizabeth, the daughter of King James I, with Frederick V of the Palatinate (son of the Frederick IV who was ridiculed by Portia in The Merchant of Venice, see page I-506). 
The two were married in February 1613, both bride and bridegroom being seventeen years old. Juno's statement that they be "honored in their issue" came true, as it happened. The couple had thirteen children. 


Ö called NaiadesÖ




Juno and Ceres sing, and with that done, a dance must be next. For that purpose, Iris makes a new call: 


You nymphs, called Naiades, of the wandring brooks,

With your sedged crowns and ever-harmless looks,

Leave your crisp channels, and on this green land

Answer your summons. ..





óAct IV, scene i, lines 128-31 


The nymphs were the spirits of wild nature, pictured as beautiful young women. (The very word means "young woman.") These came in a number of varieties. The nymphs of the mountains were "oreads," those of the trees were "dryads," and those of the rivers and streams (whom Iris has called) are "naiads." 
Properly speaking, if the nymphs were called, satyrs ought also to have been called, for they were the male counterpart, masculine spirits of the wild. However, the nymph-satyr association is an almost entirely erotic one (see page I-630), which we memorialize these days by the use of "nymphomania" and "satyriasis" as medical terms, and that would have been unsuitable for the celebration Prospero designed for the young people. Instead, harvestmen are called, and a chaste pastoral dance is staged. 


Ö the great globe itself




At the conclusion of the dance, Prospero bethinks himself that Caliban, Stephano, and Trinculo are plotting to kill him and realizes he must get back to business. He ends the masque and when the young couple look troubled, he says: 


These our actors,

As I foretold you, were all spirits and

Are melted into air, into thin air;

And, like the baseless fabric of this vision,

The cloud-capped towers, the gorgeous palaces,

The solemn temples, the great globe itself,

Yea, all which it inherit, shall dissolve,

And, like this insubstantial pageant faded,

Leave not a rack behind. We are such stuff

As dreams are made on, and our little life

Is rounded with a sleep.





óAct IV, scene i, lines 148-58 


This is a surprisingly somber speech for what is, essentially, a happy play, especially since it comes at a particularly happy time for Prospero, who sees the best part of his plan coming to such lovely fruition. 
It is almost irresistibly tempting to think Shakespeare is talking to himself at this point. At the time Shakespeare wrote The Tempest he was forty-seven years old, the prime of middle age by our standards, but quite old in his time. He may have felt the infirmity of the years creeping up on him and he may have been thinking more and more of death. As a matter of fact, he had only five more years left to live, for he died in 1616 at the age of only fifty-two. 
These beautiful lines, then, may have been his thoughtful salute to his own inevitable death and to the end of all the "insubstantial pageants" he had invented. 
It might also be viewed (without Shakespeare possibly being able to know) as an extraordinary prediction of the future life of the young couple whose real-life forthcoming nuptials were being celebrated. Young Elizabeth and Frederick, who were entering so happily into princely marriage and life, were to experience tragedy soon. 
In 1619 Frederick was elected King of the Protestant nation of Bohernia (see page I-148), which was revolting against Catholic Austria. He was still only twenty-three and he could not resist the advance in title from Elector to King. This was the beginning of the Thirty Years' War, but one year of it was enough for poor Frederick. He was defeated at the Battle of the White Mountain near Prague on November 8, 1620 (four years after Shakespeare's death), and he spent the rest of his life as a landless refugee, living on a pension granted him by the Protestant Netherlands. He died in 1632. 
His wife, Elizabeth, lived on long enough to see her brother, Charles I, defeated by revolting Englishmen and executed in 1649. She did not return to England till 1661, when her nephew had become King as Charles II. She died the year after. For Frederick and Elizabeth, a short-lived happiness had indeed dissolved and left not a rack (cloud) behind. 
And yet Juno's blessing did not go for nought (and here as elsewhere, see pages I-593 and II-192, Shakespeare's intuition led him into the making of true predictions). Frederick and Elizabeth were "honored in their issue." Not only did they have thirteen children, but one of them, Sophia, was the mother of the man who eventually became King George I of England. All the monarchs of England since 1714 have been descendants of Elizabeth and Frederick. 


I'll break my staff




Caliban and the others do not prove to be hard to handle. Ariel has already lured them on through thorns arid swamps, and when they reach Prospero's cell, spirits in the shape of dogs are set to snarling at them and drive them away. 
It remains only to settle matters with the King and the others, who, after the tantalizing episode of the banquet that came and then vanished, have been kept charmed into motionlessness till Prospero be ready for them. 
Ariel is sorry for them and expresses his sympathy, and if Prospero has been meditating any final cruelty against his enemies he abandons it. He, a human, cannot be less kind than the inhuman Ariel. 
Prospero announces that he will be satisfied to inflict no further punishment provided only the criminals are penitent. He has accomplished all he wants and it is no longer important to him that he possess his magic powers. There will be one last item to round out all and then, he says: 


I'll break my staff,

Bury it certain fathoms in the earth,

And deeper than did ever plummet sound

I'll drown my book.





óAct V, scene i, lines 54-57 


Many critics seem to think that this is Shakespeare's farewell to his art. He is saying he will write no more and will no longer practice the matchless magic of his literary genius. (This is, in my opinion, too sentimental an interpretation and I doubt it. For one thing, a compulsive writer like Shakespeare couldn't deliberately plan to give up writing while he was capable of holding a pen-on this one point I claim to be an authority. For another, he did continue to write in actual fact, engaging in two collaborative efforts with Fletcher: Henry Vlll and The Two Noble Kinsmen.)


Ö brave new world




Point by point, all is brought to a conclusion. The King and the others are brought in and are scolded and forgiven; while Gonzalo, at least, is praised and thanked. Prospero reveals his identity and takes back his dukedom. 
What's more, Ferdinand (whom Alonso and the rest thought dead) is revealed, playing chess with Miranda-to Alonso's great joy. 
Miranda, herself, is wide-eyed at all these men. She had never imagined there could be so many and she cries out in naive astonishment: 


O, wonder!

How many goodly creatures are there here!

How beauteous mankind is! O brave [splendid] new world

That has such people in't!





óAct V, scene i, lines 181-84 


The glad exclamation of Miranda has been made into part of our language in the form of a bitter sarcasm by Aldous Huxley, who in 1932 published his book Brave New World, which pictures a future society that has been completely saturated with scientific technology but at the loss of all the human values we hold dear. 
And now the crew of the ship arrive with the amazing news that despite all appearance, the vessel is in perfect shape and that not a man has been lost. Caliban, Stephano, and Trinculo also enter and are forgiven as having been sufficiently punished. 
All are to go aboard the ship, which Ariel shall speed so that it will rejoin the fleet, and then he, himself, will be free at last. 
It is a happy ending in which not one person, not one, not even the most: villainous one, Antonio, comes to any physical harm. It is as though Shakespeare in his last complete play could not leave the boards without everyone entirely happy.